O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and through its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hand, namely surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hand is very little treated in our region and is unknown everywhere, the knowledge of it has been lost and only small descriptions in books by the ancients remain, written from the hands themselves.Et si li fuers et la science de cest uvre ne demore pas en nostre region, il demore en l’autre parti de le monde, car il ne peut diez ne poer ne paitre que de ceus qui conssent li science de li corps et de li mebrues.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because the strength and science of this work do not remain in our region, they remain in the other parts of the world, for it cannot exist without those who possess the knowledge of the body and its functions.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	I think I want to animate it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of its declaration and preparation as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this must excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the judgment of the members, and forms and conjunctions, and separations of bones, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins, and the number of ears, and the movement and of their blood vessels.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And because Hypocras says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and especially in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the entrance to this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things already said, be careful that he does not fall into error and that he does not harm people;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	so I have many times more of those who interfere with this knowledge and abandon themselves without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish physician who cupped the scrofula on a woman's neck, and cupped the arteries in her neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	where so much blood flows out that the woman dies in his arms.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another surgeon who was treating a stone in a man's testicles, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would surely die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another surgeon who was treating the Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the ignorant surgeons bound the break above the wound with strong ligatures, and left the wound uncovered, and left it in that state;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded that he must not loosen it;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and it stayed like that until the leg became swollen and the foot, and it came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to loosen the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I dislocated it, he was relieved of pain and felt no discomfort.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	However, the corruption had already settled in the limb and could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease from spreading throughout the limb until the limb was completely dead.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another patient who had a wound, and then it became inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a ulcer, when it is clear of melancholy humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this reason, dear son, you must know that manual medicine is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is, where there is danger in various conditions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will demonstrate in each section of this book where there is doubt and fear.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore, you must be cautious so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.Et je mostrerai les perils et les doubtes et les maux qui sont as savans et a ceux qui n’ont point de science en medicine, si com il
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	Take up your weapons with caution, and approach your illnesses gently and firmly, using the best methods, so that through the grace of God you may achieve salvation and be praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and let the terrible diseases of deep sorrow
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	remove your weapons from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says in one of his warnings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take on a difficult disease unless you are called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have arranged this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and hot iron cauteries, and it is ordered from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the forms of instruments, and of the use of cautery, and of all that is necessary in the craft.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and of leeches and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it includes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and includes the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So that we may remember the work, I must describe the nature of each humor and its harmful qualities.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of help, and harm, are the longest words and most subtle sciences, and the secret responses;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and on this point many of the sages spoke, and they agreed with him.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I need little of their words, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery helps universally in every complexion where it has material, except in two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	that is to say, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.Et l’un de ceus deux ne doit estre cauteriz, car la cauterie ne le peut supporter; ains li autres
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In hot and dry complexion together with matter, some people said that cautery is of great help. But others said:
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cautery is of no use in illness that comes from heat and dryness.Et quant a complexion frieure et humure ensamble matiere, tous convienent qu’elle
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	Because the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured with heat nor dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and says one who says the opposite that cautery does great good for hot and dry diseases that come upon men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body to be cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And nevertheless, one should not meddle with it except those who have experienced it and who know through long usage the treatment of cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and the causes of their diseases, and their outcomes and the season of the year;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agreed and concurred with the cautery treatment.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that cautery brings fire together with the secrets of healing, and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm any other part if only slightly applied.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning medicines pass from one member to another by moving away, and bring sickly diseases to the members;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and perchance they kill the disease.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire does not do harm by its heat and for the goodness of its substance if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of my service and study that I have devoted to the art, and been placed upon the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and because of this I excuse the length of my speech, for it does not please me to take from you the secret that is contained in fire, and the quality of its work, how it cures the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in his demonstration;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed upon what time the cauteries should be performed, and chose a propitious moment.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmful humors are driven out by the help of cautery;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and especially when the cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear son, as fools do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is cured by cautery does not return;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say it like this:
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they believe, because cautery is a medicine that moves the complexions and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain; and it is worth more than other medicines for its swiftness, its strength, and the virtue of its work and its lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the illness and the place of the disease and its strength.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and the excesses are gathered in it due to the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauterization is administered in the place where there is little excess and moisture, as with tooth cauterization for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but this rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and that is because:
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterization comes after medicine; their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they are ineffective, then we turn to cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the opinion of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauteries with instruments of gold are gentler than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its lofty essence.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the site of a cautery does not cause swelling, but this is not true because I have tried it and found that it is true in some people.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and cauteries with gold are better than those with iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And yet, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if it's heated too much;
si font au feu;	if they are heated in the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and so there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use a fire cautery, which we have made appropriate for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet, so that the road is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive-oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness in the head, and there are two reasons for its use: one is because of a disease called "soda", and the other is due to many humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears, as well as for numerous ailments such as pain in the teeth and throat, and especially for diseases caused by coldness, such as paralysis, soda (a type of stroke), and similar conditions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a purifying medicine for three or four nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can endure.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	then have the patient's head examined.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	Then have the patient sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his thighs;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	After, place the palm of your hand between the roots of his nose, between his eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And there you will place two fingers, then it will bleed; then heat the cautery called 'olive', of which this is the shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and as you are lowering your hand gently, move it around in small circles;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then raise your hand gently, and examine the spot again to see if the bone is still protruding;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you do not see it, then reapply the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After, take a piece of silk and place some soft cotton inside it, then tie it around the spot and leave it for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after soaking cotton in lard;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it until the scorch is removed;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterwards, treat the wound with ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon' until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the elders say that the more the wound is left open, the more it drains;
et por ce si aide mues.	and so helps scabs to form.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must let the cautery burn until part of the bone is scorched, and then one should scrape off what is burned from the bone, and it will be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And some say that you should leave the cautery on for so long, and press down so hard that it breaks the bone as widely as the ring that women put in their navels to draw out humours;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	afterwards, one should clean and stitch it up.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And I do not think that these two methods of cautery are good at all, except in some people where there is a fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and I think I should let it go;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and the same when the head of the sick person is weakened by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more gentle and beneficial for me, and from this I perform the operation together with safety.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When a chronic headache comes and lasts a long time, one must use the herbs and pills that are called 'concoctions', as well as poultices, oils, and plasters for the head;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one performs the cautery that we have previously mentioned, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care if the head of the patient is of a strong nature, and it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize him under that cautery, a little bit that we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After cauterizing each horn of the head to the bone, as we have said before, and making the cautery in the place called "vessel",
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and it is the places where one applies cupping glasses.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	And lighten your hand so that you do not go to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	And the cauteries on the horns must be more delicate than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery on the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain comes in a part of the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and one has done the other remedies that I have said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not help:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then you must perform cauterizations according to two methods, namely with hot iron and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cautery with hot iron is done by taking a piece of alder wood, removing the bark and heating it until it smokes. Then you make the cauterization at the site of the pain in such a way that you can place the alder wood under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it is applied, tie it tightly and leave it for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	Then loosen it and treat it with garlic, leaving the wound open for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then cover it with a linen cloth soaked in butter until the swelling goes down.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the wound has healed, treat it with ointment until it is completely healed.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you wish, you can also use some burning medicines which I have written about in the twelfth treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery with iron is as follows.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery, of which there is the shape.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "clos" because the head is formed in the shape of a cloak with a slight curve, and in the middle has a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and he puts it over the painful area, and holds his hand and twists it slightly so that half of the thickness of the heart is burned;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and then release your hand so that the artery burns, which is hot, and an abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After, put cotton in the wound, and hold it there for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then he applies wet cotton soaked in butter, and then he treats the area with ointment until it heals;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called "cultellare", at the tip only, and be careful not to touch the artery in this hemorrhoid which is not old.
de emigraine	of veins
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a headache as we have previously described in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries before mentioned in medicine, neither with fire nor with iron, benefit him, then you must heat the cautery which is called 'cultellare' until it turns white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And sign thus on the temple a line of half an inch long, and remove your hand once, and press it so that you do not touch the artery and go no deeper than the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And beware of the mandible that mutates when one chews, and the nerve has no reaction, and that spasms do not come to illness, and beware of blood flow from the artery when it is cut, for this cutting brings great fear especially to those who are unaccustomed and inexperienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leaves the work halfway;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stanch blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery that has two knives;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cautery is better and more effective than the other one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear persists despite treatment with solutive medicines and other remedies that we have described in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery called «poins», which has the following shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	Afterwards, prick all around the ear where the pain is located in both ears if it occurs in both, and move slightly upwards from the root of the ear after you have marked the place to be cauterized;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and has X points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth's torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Wounds that should be treated with cautery are only those that cause bleeding, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not apply cautery to appearances that come from dryness and nerve pain.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this appearance of a wound that bleeds from fluids and discharges from the head and from gargling, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, another slightly further from the temple, and the third in the junction between the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and cauterize above the tip of the ear at the horn of the head, and another one on the temple as long as a finger;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery on until the middle of the heart is burned.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it has the appearance of the scalpel that we placed earlier, but it is a little more slender and the blade should be a little thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterward, dress the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then make him three cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called 'vessel' as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and dress them as we have said before.And if he has an old wound and you dress it thus as we have said,
de litargie	of quicksilver
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, give the patient large pills to cleanse the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	then completely shave the head of the sick person and place on the back of the neck the mustard plaster that is written about in the treatise on plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is how to do the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if he does it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is cured in this way, that is good;s’il ne fuet, querre li un embaumeur ou un med
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	if not, get an embalmer or a doctor[who will] cauterize the scalp from the top of the head down to the neck, and have two inches between each cautery;and if he is not cured, he should be given three cauteries on the scalp, going down from the top of the head to the neck, with two inches between each cautery;s’il ne fut sanz dolor et sanz saingne, querre li un embaumeur ou
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	if there is no pain and no bleeding, get an embalmer or a doctor[who will] cauterize it as the others, and if you see any hair coming out, and the patient is enduring it, do one cautery in the middle;et si tu vels ajouter encores plus de cauteres, querre li un embaumeur ou
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and treat it until it is healed.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and use the cautery called "olive tree", as I have already said.
de la froidor dou chief	from the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	The head must be cleansed of hair and of what we have already mentioned;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After shaving the head of the patient, then do cauterization all over the head and on each horn, and once behind and three times on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then do four cauterizations on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it be until the hottest part burns, then lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After healing, use the cautery called "olive tree" which we have mentioned earlier.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; it is first necessary to cleanse the brain of hair and other things that we mentioned in the division when the illness is great and suffering, taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him a gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meat.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after the king the head in the middle, and make the cautery according to what we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the ailment is external and tolerable, make him cauteries as I have said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive according to the manner that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is in an infant, make to him 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with mild cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy there is the surplus declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain is cleansed, according to what it says before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the king the head of the ailment;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After that, make a well-made linen bandage, as a circle, and put it around the head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the ailment tied up, and held firmly on all sides.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After that, present the linen, and apply the plasters of old beaver fur;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat the fire gently so that he can bear it when you apply it to him.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after emptying the circle within the head, and letting it cool.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient once every week with other good treatment until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you want to cauterize it all over by making multiple points on the whole cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This cautery moistens the brain greatly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on cotton wetted in butter and grease of goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of their eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When eye disease first appears in the eyes through the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	Afterwards he orders him to turn his head and cauterizes the scalp, doing 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the headache is in both eyes together, or one if it is in one eye;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cut all the veins and arteries that are beneath the head with the cautery, and make the cauteries long according to the width of the temples;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and guard against bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with as much power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision, the cautery how to stop it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes a cautery or hot iron is placed beneath the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	where tears come from the body
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When tears are old and accustomed to being on veins, or beneath arteries that are on the outside of the head;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and it is seen that this is from cold phlegmatic excesses, then he should do the cautery which I have mentioned earlier in the downward breath to the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cautery on the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hot irons beneath the two bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if more is needed, then he should cauterize bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through which the body cries inside them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat him according to what we have said in the previous section, and he does not improve, then give the patient three nights of drinking through a tube.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king, take the head, and cauterize it with olive oil in the middle of the cautery.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And make two cauteries with a cautery called 'clavicle' above the two joints, a little under the hairline;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and be careful of the artery that you do not pierce it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery, which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which there is the shape:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see, make two cauteries on the joints as long as the joints are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave the hand except that the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have described.And if you see, make two cauteries on the joints as long as the joints are; and do not leave the hand except that the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that points the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes the hair of the eyelids turns towards the inside, and prick the eye, and they make cauteries according to two methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	it is known from fire, or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	The patient should be instructed to let the hairs grow long and even by using a fire cautery;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow out.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in a warm bath;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	afterwards, draw on paper a figure that is similar to the hollow of a myrtle berry, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then place wet cotton soaked in egg white and musk of periwinkle over the eye, then heat the cautery so that it matches the shape;
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	Afterwards, cauterize little by little according to the figure you have drawn, so that the heat reaches the area;Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme,
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the sign of health is when you see the gums recede, and the hair stands up on the tip of the nose;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then release your hand, and leave it for three days, then apply wet cotton in butter until the blister is healed;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after cleaning the wound until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if afterwards hair comes and the gums are soft then restart the cautery on the same spot, just as you did before;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hair has fallen out, then cauterize until the gums are raised to their natural level, and are even, and do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The hot cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hair grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take French soap and live lye, of each one-third, and grind them well together;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the mold that you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put them on paper.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the illness is only in one eye, then it should be treated there, and if in both, then in both;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put underneath the eye cotton moistened with egg white;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the head of the patient should be in a healthy position, and put your hand showing under the medicine, and press it gently and move it around every time the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, for it stings as if it were fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the stinging has passed, lift up the eye, and check if you see the paper lifted as it was lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is like that, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then apply more medicine to the area until the work is equalized and the eyes are set in their proper position.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place wet cotton wool on the wound until it heals, after cleaning the area of the ointment that is called "diafenes" and others, so that it is clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to take care of your work well with great care that it does not leak medicine into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the area that has softened of the paper properly, just as you did before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	After cleaning it until it is healed;and li poils soient lons, et li oculi ne se muevent en lor nass
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and the hairs are long, and the eyes do not move in their growth: and this is the shape of the fire-shackle:se li fuelles
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size, and according to this is your constraint;et s’il adonsent les poils qui sont sur la fuellie, il se doit mettre le cautere en lor nassance et le tenir tant qu’il ardisse, si com tu as dit;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and is not returned to the right path by one who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and have the assistant hold the patient's head between his hands in such a way that it does not move or nod;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	then soak cotton in vinegar or pigeon droppings and place it over the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	next, heat the cautery iron to a medium temperature;
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and hold it to the head in the shape of an arch over the eye;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see it pointing from one side to the other, and if you see, it is also like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but all the same, this is how it should be held for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After opening the fistula, press and drain it, and then dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, she works on it and draws out the bowstring;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	afterwards, put on the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the place under the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of cautery as far as the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then repeat the cautery again once more, and another time if you need to, and leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	afterwards, put on wet cotton in butter, and let it heal with the ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and let the king do as he wishes in his kingdom.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula which some of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand about a fistula, and probe the area;si li fistule a III entres, si ne fuige pas le cautere, et
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	after placing it in the split , apply a subtle chamois which has the form :
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and they make to the amount of an egg;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand on the chamois firmly so that the patient does not move at all, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to place on the patient's eye wet cotton soaked in vinegar or in water:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the lead will heal the fistula, and the healthy eye will be miraculously healed.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must open the vein and draw the fistula back into the body of the vein according to what is appropriate in its own place.Et si li fistule sont en la main, ou en la pie, ou en autrui membrez del corps, si covient aministrer pertus au neif qui sont approchiez de li fistule:
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur in the lips that are called "hair," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections above, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And they place it in these holes until it reaches the bottom;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterwards, clean the area of ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess forms at the root of the gum or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, afterwards it becomes suppurant and rot, and is lanced and becomes a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in sections, and it does not help at all:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	therefore, you must have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron comes to the bottom of it, and at the back also;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this once or twice after treating it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated thus, that is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then one must expose the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find in his shoulder joint.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't help, then put the head of the patient in your lap;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After heating the cautery of which the form will come below in such a way that you put a cane on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	then lift your hand and reapply the cautery according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	then fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let him gargle for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, a tooth that was loose is made firm, and the gums are made soft and moist, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and the remedies of medicine do not work, then cautery is needed in two ways:Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and put it on the end of a spoon made of iron or copper.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a skewer, then dip it in hot butter and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And so do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see moisture in wool and cotton, dip it in cold butter and apply to the aching tooth, and place hot iron on top until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	Fire cauteries are performed with an iron or copper rod that is thick enough that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After you heat the cautery, in the shape that follows, apply it to the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery cools.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	do so often, because the pain will go away that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter quickly before this cautery, and then he can bear the heat;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery of whatever size you want, according to what you are able;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the tongs:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrofula is caused by cold moisture and is unresponsive to medicine, then heat the cautery so that this form comes next, and it has two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side of the cautery;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or as many times as necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and apply wet cotton on the burn until the scorching is healed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterwards, treat the area with ointments and poultices until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture prevails upon the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be purged by solubilizing remedies;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	afterwards, apply the cautery to the root of the throat, and be careful not to go too far into the throat, and do not burn the heart but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	Afterwards, apply another cautery at the junction of the neck and the head, at the top of the spine, and let the cautery be the one called 'clavicle', as we have described it earlier;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the area as we have said before, until it is healed.
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all illnesses of the stomach are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the illness is chronic, then perform fire cauterization on the navel in the affected areas.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery between the breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and the cautery that is called "key" according to the form that was described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see it, perform a cauterization by piercing the entire cautery that is called "pin", according to the form described earlier for ear diseases;et si les poils sont lons et laies et ne se puet muevre li mal, fai cautere sus lor nassance de coi li cauteres qui est apelez «aguyl» selonc le
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if the hairs are long and laid back, and the patient cannot move, perform a cauterization at their base with the cautery that is called "needle", according to the following
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the wound according to what has been said before, let there be three cauteries according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason cauteries are gentler when you do them three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, have the patient lie on his back and on his side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	then gently press his heart with the tip of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if it is dislocated inside, heat up the cautery which has the shape of the nerve's path;
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the side, and you will see the shape of the cautery in four places;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason, six cauteries are made with the cautery which has three nerves, so that the shape of the cauterizations are six cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery which has three nerves;
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve so there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	Afterwards, put crushed vitriol on the cautery;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, have the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, not much happens, therefore make the cautery on the thick part of the cautery clave, or a lot of cauteries in puncturing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When there are chills and a lot of moisture in the stomach, drawing it out to his complexion, and many catharres multiply in him, and he is not helped by the usual methods of treatment, then the patient should be placed on his back, extending his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Of this then after make three cauteries I under the collar bone by the quantity of a bean, at all cautery clave, and two cauteries apart on either side so that the figure of the cauteries is in three angles, and there is such space between them that they do not come together when they bend rot;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and be the cauteries so deep that they pustulate both parts of the heart, and be the figure of the cauteries according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you wish to cauterize a large cautery within the stomach according to this form:
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterize in pointing and sign upon the stomach I. point according to the quantity that you wish to eat;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize it at all cautery which is called "points.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the ulcer that we have discussed earlier, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When pain in the liver comes from cold and moisture and excessive windiness, as it is forced out of its natural disposition by excesses.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of this as we have said in the sections above, but if he does not benefit, then he should be bled over his liver.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and perform three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity over the liver, avoiding the hypogastric region, where the intestines of man are.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	There should be the thickness of a thumb between each cautery.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	The cauteries should be held lightly on the body, and your hand should not press down too hard during the entire cautery process.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	Only half of the cautery should be applied at a time, and the patient should be kept upright on his feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	And if he cannot stand, then he should lie down and extend his legs and raise his arms.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish, you may cauterize with the sword, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the whole body; you would cause it to wither.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and do not let it come to boiling, for the skin is very delicate in that place, and you can tell by looking.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, then the pain is not too severe;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the membrane, then there is violent pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment is being applied to the abscesses, the patient should be reclining on his back;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	then press down on the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is like a rod, and this is how it is done:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery until the skin is burned, and goes as far as the nerve, until all the pus is gone.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the wound has healed, according to the treatment of wounds, until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and one must not use this cautery except by someone who has studied medicine for a long time, and by whom these diseases have been corrupted at times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can safely operate, and in any case it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make cauteries for pleurisy from the roots of aristologist, and in such a way:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	take a root of aristologist that is long, dry, as thick and as long as your two fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and anoint it in oil, and heat it in embers, and cauterize the large cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little lower down on the part that is under the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and perform cauterization between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining slightly backward.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cautery in the groin, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two at either side of the groin below the cautery between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press your hand, but do it plainly as in perfumery.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancient ones said that one should use an iron cautery like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and jump out of the pain, as we have said about the abscess in the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this operation there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of warts with what we have said about the divisions of treatment, and it does not help, then they resort to three methods of cauterization, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of these, one method is that you make three or four cauteries, aligning them according to the length of the mouse, and according to the shape of the cautery of the liver which we have described before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand to the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way of cauterization is to heat the cautery which has the nerve, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the skin where the mouse is, or the wound comes from the left side, and let the elevation be according to the skin, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	Afterwards, push the heated cautery into the nerve until it pierces through to the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and in this way there will be four holes.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see that it is necessary, then cauterize with the entire cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the ulcer has healed for a long time, it is worth more than the other ulcers mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	A cautery is not suitable for an epidenitis, except in the manner that is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment is not helping, then you must make four cauteries around the armpit, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the mouse, two behind the back on the spine, and one on the buttock;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and the cautery should be applied close to the thick part of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards, let the cautery remain open for a long time, and do not stop treating the disease after the cautery;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions with the help of God will come together.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the key that we have shown before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there.
de l’enfleure des piez	of foot swelling
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in the case of dropsy, and they are full of yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and move your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go too deep, thus one will avoid the yellow awl, and let the cautery follow this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the tibia;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries for a long time without curing, until the evil comes out;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the other cures that we have spoken of.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a distension of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive power which is in the stomach and intestines is impaired, and cannot be cured by any means of curing;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and very weak, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before about the cautery of the stomach, with a circulating cautery;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and make 4 cauteries around the belly subtle and within each cautery a subtle cautery-needle, and 2 cauteries on the hips;
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of large amounts of cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said by division, and it does not help to make cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	III on the spine of the back, that which is all out of alignment below, tap and tap in a triangular shape, and I cauterize below the armpit II times;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think his stomach is cold, and the meat is not digesting, and one sees the face swell, then on the face we make the great cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse with the whole cauterization of the clavicle;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery remain open a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cleaning the wound until it heals.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carnosity which is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut the skin, heat the cauterizer which resembles a razor, and then place it all ablaze on the copped skin;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and leave your hand so that the cautery comes to the origin of the vein, from which the blood flows.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is much inflammation, then cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	After the treatment of the wounds with beneficial ointments until they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the ulcer, it will have greater benefit.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is a fistula, and it becomes suppurating and oozing corrupted moisture, then you must probe it with a thin rod, and be careful that you know how deep the rod goes into the tent.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery which seems right to the surgeon, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the pus has entered, and repeat the cautery until the infected and rotten flesh is burnt, once, or twice or three times, according to the amount of its need.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And be careful not to burn any nerve that is there, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestine, then be careful of those places, and do not push too hard, and think that it is not a sensitive spot.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after curing the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is suppurating and the matter has been discharged for a long time, then once you see that the wound is completely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matter has not been discharged, know that the wound is infected and the bone at the bottom is rotten;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus according to one of those we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When cold pain comes with heavy rains and strong winds, and does not take hold of a woman, then you should make a cautery on the breasts on both sides using the claw-shaped cautery instrument we described earlier;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterize it in the middle, then there should be three cauteries in a line, and they will be of greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the underside of the penis, where the hairs begin at the base, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the tip of a finger;
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and make a fire cautery on his back, or wherever you need it.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and the cautery should be made in the shape described above.
de la marris	of the mare
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the body is cold and moist, and fails to conceive, and the flowers are corrupt and their termini late;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, there is great pain;
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	therefore, one must make three cauteries around the womb, as we have said in the cautery for the bladder, and two fire cauteries on the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and the cautery should be made in the shape described above.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When viscous moistures descend into the box of the hip, and because of this, it dislocates from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and the place of the dislocation is found hollow, then one must cauterize the patient on the hip at one cautery similar to a circle, and mark around the hip in front of the location as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if it is such a cautery as that with which one cauterizes the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present, make three large olive-stone cauteries, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the ulcers.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the disease is cured of what we have said in the section and the cure does not work, and the disease is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with stinking pills, or other good-smelling pills like them.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After that, make a cautery:
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the way of the cautery is according to two ways:Car il faut adonc prendre le fu de l’olivaire et li fai III cauteres
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	That is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cauteries.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery can be performed in many ways, one of which is as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the hip joint in a triangular shape according to this pattern, and make each cautery deep and large, with the distance between each cautery the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	sometimes cauterization is performed in the middle of the hip joint, with four cauteries according to this pattern:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you wish, cauterize it with a circular cautery as we have described before for dislocation of the hip.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But do it in such a way that the circle contains all of the hip, and all of the soft tissue is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is the way they do it in sciatica when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it extends to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle on both sides.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cautery be with a hot iron, and burn the thickness of the skin;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the pain extends to the top of the foot or near there, cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four with the cautery that is called a "point.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if need be, do more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it seems that the pain is beneath the knee toward the thigh, cauterize with the flat or circular cautery; and be careful in all your cauteries not to let the iron stay so long as to burn the nerves and large arteries, nor to cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and all the feet were corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach ache which caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two places together, do cautery in one and then the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men say about the cautery of the hip, from which this is the way: make such an iron and let it be as wide at the tip as a little finger, or a bit less, and let it be serrated on both edges with the space between each serration being the thickness of a finger joint;
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the tongs be divided into two parts, and also be like noses, and let it have one handle of well-made iron;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is all red and glowing, and then place it on the box of the diseased hip, and then turn it over to the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and cauterize it once with the cautery and leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make an ointment from suet, and let the wound remain open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its appearance, and those who use it sparingly see little success;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries that can be endured by those who are able to tolerate it and in the places where it is effective.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cautery of medicine burns if you make the instrument to interlace in such a way that the edge of the door descends, and it is made of bronze or iron with one side long, and in the thickness it has 2 nuts, and between each there is the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and they are open below and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	Afterwards place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and then press your hand firmly on the box of the hip.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Afterwards pour between the two circles of the hot awe which is heated in the fire for one hour, and let the patient endure the heat and scorching.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For he will find relief as from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the burning is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and leave it thus for three days, and put on butter until that which was scorched is healed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let him for three days until the swelling goes down;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last remedy after treating with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, then make the instrument that colors red according to how you made it in the hip dislocation;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the manner of the hot color, and I have written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together, and put them in a nine-pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small hole so that the point of a needle can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and then put another pot well-plumbed on top of it, and place an alkali and heat and the red dye on top, until there is two fingers' worth of powder above the liquids, after you have mixed it well with your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it be thus until dye water and pieces fall into the plumbed pot; then take all that dye, and pour it over heat and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then there will be a fever, which is treated with various medical remedies and cauteries on other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	Because it does the same harm as fire, and there are other remedies with which one can cauterize the hip just like this: theriac, and honey of aniseed, and chalk mixed with soap. All these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells of a remedy by which a man was cured of sciatic pain and a vein in his hip, and he praises it highly, saying that nothing else was done to him, and that he was healed in one go after this treatment, and that he then bathed as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And you should prepare it in this way: take litarge in powder, dry and green, and grind it a lot with a little grease, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and leave it there;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation. Then, take off the litarge and wash the area with wine, and if the pain still remains, repeat the process again.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then he enters the bath until his body is somewhat warmed, and he enters the bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicine with cautery unless after the evacuation of the body's fluids.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cautery must be done in such a way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it in the hollow between the big toe of the foot and the one next to it, which is called the 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	Take dry goat's hair, and take it to the fire until it is charcoal, and place it on the wool, and let it be until it turns ash;
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And do this again, and do not stop doing this until you feel through sensation that it has reached the hip, and the pain has ceased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this method of cautery is called "goat's hair cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes in the back, whether from falling or impact or from excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter, none of these appearances are worth cauterizing for, except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	After this, the patient should be bled with foul pills or similar, applied to their back where the pain is located, drawing three lines across, and in each line making V cauteries or more depending on the strength and amount that the patient can endure;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and the cautery should be done according to the cautery called "points";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three cauteries or four with the clave cautery tool according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	This disease often affects young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrow throat when they wake up, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	You will find it in the spine at the back, and the appearance of the others that come above the spine.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you cure it, then cauterize it with a silver cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the purple cautery evenly affects each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery 2 or 3 lines apart, and have the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards, heal the site until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery to any area that is swollen with pus and is affecting a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When joint pain is caused by moistors that are expanded in each part of the body, and when it comes from the feet, which they call "podagre" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and does not heal with medicines, then it is healed with cauteries in such a way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the mouth of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to prick on the sole of the foot, do so with the entire cautery that one calls «point».
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come up to the knees and the other joints, and this happens many times, then do cautery on each knee with three cauteries or four of each part, all in the olive-shaped cautery;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand against it any longer than the thick of your heart is burnt.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery we have described in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then make points on every joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize every part and make good government for the patient and take medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good treatment and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	from the root of the eye socket
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a hernia comes in the groin and the intestines descend into the scrotum, and it is new, then when you want to cure it, let him not eat that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and let him use things that loosen the belly so that the feces descends from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after making him lie on his back between your hands, instruct him to tense his abdomen so that the bowels are drawn up, and bring them towards your fingers, and sign from under the navel over the bone of the wrist, and throughout a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery with which there is the shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and dripping blood.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	then bring the bowels back to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the assistant holds his hand so that they do not return;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and open the thighs for the patient, and put a pillow under his hips and a servant on each thigh pressing down, and another on the feet holding his hands down;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then place the cautery on the sign all around your hand, and hold it straight and press until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and be careful that the blister does not burst when you apply the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	that you do not burn yourself;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that the patient does not die, or suffer some other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And one must make the cauteries for children small according to their ears, and for large people also large according to their size;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after 3 days, clean the site of the cautery with butter until the scald is healed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	afterwards, apply other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well-healed;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and one must let the hair grow long enough that the blister does not burst when he is getting up and moving around.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made brace, and wear it for another 40 days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and has good rest, works little and guards against too much eating and drinking and too much sexual activity;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter about the treatment of cutting in his shoulder.
de la routure dou ventre	of stomach ulcers
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, then do the cautery with fire according to its quantity, and burn the third of the heart;
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cautery according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and some of the ancients say that one should cauterize it with a three-pointed cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the site of entry and make a line along its width above the ulcer, and another across, and hold your hand still all over during the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in a limb, either from falling or from injury, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'sharp', and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its torture and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is healed by the first cautery, that is good;et s’il n’est pas sanez, tu le remets a son leu et tu le
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	and if he is not healed, you reset it to its place and you repeat the cautery on that one, for such is the custom that it should move to the member that is nearest to it, so you must do the cauteries until the patient is healed.et s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; et s’il n’est pas sanez, tu le remets a son leu et tu le recomences I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer
de meselerie	of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Some diseases are aided by cautery with great benefit, especially those that arise from putrefied humours and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When you see it cauterized, be careful if the disease is in its early stages, and if it is healed according to what we have said in the division, neither decreasing nor lingering, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the disease, then do V cauteries on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	and I emmi the head to the back of the neck, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairline;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two on either side of the head, and one behind the neck;De la quare conme il est necesser que li cauteres soit fait sus li chef, adonques covient qu’
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone and comes to the surface so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape;Si tu veies qu’il ne se peut tros bien, adonques covient que li fai a la fine II cauteres sus les lombris de lor ciefs, et li enveie tant que ele vienne sus li chief,
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize it on the mole according to its appearance.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the mange is spread everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and she is losing her hair, then you must cauterize her with the cauteries that we have described earlier: one cautery on the head, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large cautery on the groin, and one smaller one, two cauteries on both shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	two cauteries on the inside of the elbows, two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the knuckles of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the lower back;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	sometimes you will make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that when you make more cauterizations, you help him more, and move him to profit.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as the healthy man does, because his body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, treat the site with a poultice of wheat flour with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes to a limb and is cured by medicines and oils and poultices, but it is not healed, then he should make cauterizations on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb;
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cautery be a little into the depth of the heart;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes cauterizations are made on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus is removed the swelling;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and yet one should not intermeddle with this unless he understands the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of albaras
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is woke up, and medicine's art is of no use, then cauterize it with a cautery tool slightly deeply, according to the amount of thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed, and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then treat it with a poultice of wheat flour and lentils, with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the gut and blood from the almond, each in equal parts.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mix it all together, then bind it with a cloth, and keep it in place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of sores by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre appears at its beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the perimeter of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And nonetheless, the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer:
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	And I do not think this is good, for I fear that it may be burned and damaged, and indeed, I have seen this happen.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and a better way is to cauterize around it with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot subside
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays death either due to the excess fluid it creates or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old) and they have little blood, or because of time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see them hastening to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize them around with many small cauteries by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards, leave it as is.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Because it will hasten its death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all around with the cautery, then heat the cautery from which the form comes:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of the disease called  "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them throughout his body in such a way that the flow of the pus is relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, heal it perfectly.Si li saingne ne vult point curer ou si il demoure longuement en la meureir: adonques tu le remets a leu et covient que li fies 10 cauteres entor de l’esgoutte, et estraigne li keur par les eculz qui sont sus le piez, ou s’il ne veult point aler par les piés, adonques tu le traites a la maniere qu’adibele.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is called "corroding", and it is nothing other than a melting of the member, for it melts the members as fire melts dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire cautery, then heat the cauteries small and large according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	afterwards, cauterize it all over until you reach all the corruption and none of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed.Se il a grant dolor sus li leu qui tu cauterise, adonques tu prendras un petit trefon que tu aschaufes en la flamme del fuo et li laves li oucis de leu ou il a dolor, si com il
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for 3 days, and apply soft poultices with oil upon the cauterized places until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed.Et si li cauteres feuz ne puissent osteit toute la corruption, adonques covient qu’il soit remede par eschaudures de leus.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of inflammations caused by humidity.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that no hair grows, that is good.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then restart the cautery on what is left of the corrupted hair.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this baldness has sometimes been cured with medicine in place of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but nonetheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already described the cure for medicine baldness in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that on different feet a disease called "clos" according to our understanding occurs, and is a large, hard lump that affects the foot.Et si li pies sont trots, et ne peut aller en son office, que il soit eslongeant de la foyt que il doit; et si li pies de la main sunt trots, qu’il ne peut faire aucun ofis de main: et est li pies de la main et le pied trots, selonc la nassance.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is made so that you heat the cautery iron as hot as an oven, and it is made of good steel to the size that it can pierce the claw all around, and it has fine edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	afterwards place it directly on the claw, and rotate your hand all around the claw until it reaches the bottom of the claw;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let him leave it for three days until it begins to ooze pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night; the nail will come loose and be pulled out by the roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the wound with an ointment until it is cured.Cautere d’aigue chaude si est que tu prends de l’aigue boullante et la mets sus li clou tant qu’il fieent giter, et le remuers tot entor, et le remuers tot entor; puis li fai un emplaustre come celuy del cautere de feu.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are turned around in the body, and often occur in hands and feet, then you must apply hot water cautery;
et est en teil maniere:	and it is done in this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a brass or iron rod, or a pen of reed, and place it on the nail and the warts, that is to say, calluses;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and place the rod so that it wraps around the nail, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn the rod so that the edge of the rod comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water a deep path all the way to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient endure the biting of hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then let it be, and it will all come out by its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you have pulled out all those in the body, then heal them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the shaking treatment
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When someone trembles from coldness in their nerves, or from a fever, or something else, you should make 4 cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebrae:
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cautery on the penis, and one cautery on the stomach with an olive-oil cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	it will stop the trembling, and hasten the healing from the cold sickness.Si aurent les ches et les costez et les cuissiez fies, si covient que li fuiles la fi
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	There appear sometimes through the body sores or stinking pustules, which come from corrupt humours.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	If they have sores and blisters on their shoulders, ribs, or thighs, then one must, when they first appear, make cauteries at the top of each blister:et li cauteres si fient ains qu’eles se brisent; et après que ele sont
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	and the cauteries should be done until they burst; and after they have been burst, a fine cautery with a sprig of myrtle, or with the long root of aristolochia, or with a lens-shaped cautery.Si aurent les ches et les costez et les cuissiez fies, si covient que li fuiles la fi
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from thereforth, but the excess from which they come is disrupted, and they are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and in similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is very difficult to stop the bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And yet, when this happens to someone, you must quickly place your finger over the wound of the vein and hold it very firmly until the bleeding stops underneath your finger, and no more blood comes out;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then heat up several small and large olive-sized cauteries until they are all red hot;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take a large or small cautery according to the wound and the location where the artery is running, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the bleeding starts again when you lift your finger from the wound and the cautery goes out, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease doing this one after the other until the blood is staunched;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when blood escapes from an artery, it cannot be staunched easily itself when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have described;
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a tight bandage, or by medicine placed on it that has the power to staunch blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and it should be bound and restrained skillfully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	He who administers a tight bandage or places hot objects on top, or similar things, will not benefit much if at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and there is no mirror or medicine available, one should place their index finger on the wound as we have said, and apply pressure until it feels tight on the wound and on the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move the finger but wet it with cold water often as long as it is very cold until the blood is congealed and swollen and tight.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries beforehand about what he needs in terms of cauterizations and medications.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about all illnesses that require fire cauterization, or burning medications, and their actions, causes, instruments, forms of cauterizations;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and have placed this chapter from the head to the feet, and I will go through this same path in this chapter because one can more easily find what they are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I may begin this, it is necessary, dear son, for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of that greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often an evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and making an incision over an abscess, and in treating wounds, and in extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	Where there is doubt and fear, many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I admonish you that you do not attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in many ways people come to cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	they come from such people who, because of their disease, change quickly and die because of the great severity of their illness.Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoignes la dislocation premierement.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and one should fear these.Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And from these there are those who give their sense and say:"Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am ready.
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the patient is desperate.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You should not consent to those who come to you with this condition, but place more importance on your honor than your desire. Do not open it recklessly, but wisely and carefully, from what you are certain of and what you can cure and gain reward from.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	Use prognosticating and indication in curing your patients so that salvation may be achieved.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And that will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have assigned this chapter to you in discussing the topic of cautery, according to what has been presented before in the chapter on cautery from head to foot, so that you can find more easily whatever you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often comes to children during childbirth, and when the head of the child is squeezed too tightly.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	I have never seen this disease in adults, and in all the cases I have observed, death has always resulted.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for this reason, it seems to me that I should leave the work in several parts.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	I saw a child whose neck was filled with fluid, and his head swelled every day so much that he could not support it;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and it filled with fluid to the point of death, and this fluid collected under the bone above the throat, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the procedure is such that if the fluid is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a large incision in the neck;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the fluid runs out;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and here is the form of the spleen:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the hollow is deeper, and the abscess is larger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the fluid is under the bone, and you see the edges of the wound gaping open in every part, and the fluid spurts out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not close up for you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	then you must cut three slits on the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, draw out all moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After that, press the slits with pieces of cloth and powders, and apply wine and oil, and leave it thus for five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then remove it, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head hang freely, and give the patient dry food without moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is that you observe where the abscess opens, and the gathering of pus;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes behind;
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Therefore cut where the abscess opens and drains pus, and make an incision according to what you are able to do.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and guard against covering the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and blood will flow, causing the patient to die from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	from gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the feet, and the disease is old, and the medicine does not help, then the last resort is cautery with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore, when you see them covered, have the patient lean back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then squeeze the patient's neck tightly with the cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the vein bites, and the veins on either side are behind the ears, and they are very close together;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then sign the veins inside, then cover one and press the other with a sharp spatula for two parts, so that the neck vein comes to the bone, and it should be done from the side of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also .ij. fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow out continuously upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open on feeling, then you must measure the quantity of space of three beans, then sign inside and cut to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and the amount of blood to be let out should be VI ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can endure and the fullness of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if there is a lump on the bone, and pus does not come out, then open the wound and drain it, and treat it with ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	from the emetic
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old-age anemia comes, and catarrh is acute, due to moistors of the eyes and heat in the temples and ancient soddeness and similar things, and he has been treated by various methods of medicine and all of it does not help him, then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extraction is that the patient should stand behind the hair on his temples, and feel for the artery which opens in the temple, as it can be felt clearly through its pulsation, and is not very deep beneath the skin in some people who are too thin.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is deep, the patient should press his neck with some fabric, then rub the area with something rough, and wash the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula from which its shape comes:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers, and carefully separate it from the tissues underneath in each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, then cut off that part according to the amount of the two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cupped, the blood will not flow everywhere throughout the body.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw out the blood from six parts, just up to three;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not enter before the wound heals, and the blood comes out freely;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then cut off the excess between the two ties in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron all the way to the bone until the shoulder is cut through;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and it is the mother's work, if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cautery is used to dry up moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	therefore it is of greater help for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or, for the extraction of veins, one should fill the hole with old cotton and place a well-made tent on top;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are removed, they should be treated with dry medicines that cause scabs to form, and with tents, until they are healed;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if, without cutting the artery as far as you operate, you hasten to cover it with cautery, then employ the site of vitriol and squeeze it in your hand so that the blood is stanched;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have vitriol available, then place your finger on the site so that the blood congeals, and apply cold water to the site until the bleeding stops, and then squeeze it as necessary;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and that which is more mature and easier to extract from the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery in two parts, but the cutting should be well-spaced so as to guard against their heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	Because when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it must have between the two knives a thickness of a finger's width, and then when you have cut into both sides, you should place the hot iron on it until it reaches to the bone, and close the vein in two places.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and they must be spaced apart between the two joints because it is not fused together by this cautery in its entirety.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And here is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When tears from the eyes are flowing from veins that are above the forehead, and it does not respond to any medicine that is applied, and you see the face of the ill person turning red, and feeling a pulsation as if from trembling;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and if they are dark and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids have fallen out, and the eyelids are swollen and scorched from the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "cured by contusion", and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease, letting the hairs grow on his forehead, then make three incisions on his forehead evenly according to the length of his forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and one of the incisions should be about two inches down from the forehead in the middle, and the other two at the sides above the eyelids; and beware of cutting into the arteries that are at the sides above the eyelids;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and keep your hand away from the continuations of the two mandibles, and let each wound be about a third of an inch deep across the joints;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have at hand a piece of sponge and plenty of bandages to wipe away the blood, then insert the spatulum, cut into two pieces, with which you will make the incision:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision by the temple all the way to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and cut all around the skull between the two slits down to the bone, then cut from the middle slit to the other second one, and then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put into the first cut the instrument that is called "culter", and is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the knife cutting towards the chest bone in the heart, and the other knife towards the bone, and cut it so that it comes to the middle split.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to that which opens up the skull, and then likewise make an incision in the middle slit up to the other one;
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then draw out the blood equally, and express the area for the blood that has been taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then place in each slit a tent of old cotton, and place on top wet bandages soaked in wine and oil and garlic, and be sure that no abscesses form there;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer a plentiful poultice of warm water, then treat with basilicon ointment and rosemary oil, and other remedies for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When someone experiences acute cataracts and you see their eyes become dim and small, and their vision weakens, and the eyelids burned:
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and in the forehead there is great pain, and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	therefore you may know from these accidents that these matters and this cataract come from many veins, and the mother fluid that is in it, is thus cured.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another wide one nearby.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that move the eye;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, [the surgeon] should suck out all the blood with a sponge and then stuff between the two lips of the wound with old cotton and linen bandages.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then [the surgeon] should lay moistened cloths in wine and oil on top, and beware of hot abscesses;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, you should rub the bone until pus begins to form, then clean the wound with dry substances that cause pus to form.
En teil maniere:	In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take 2 parts of flower of wheat and 4 parts of colophony, and make an ointment;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it in these wounds to cause pus to form throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the cleaning of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls from the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grains, or a stone from a mine, or something similar like iron;si est grain, le leve et le met en aigue vieille que n’ait poil, si covient que tu
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, such as beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing substances such as water, oil, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it shrinks in the ear, or something else that doesn't adhere to or grow in the ear, put the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see a stone, then drip some violet oil or oil of castorem, then administer an extract;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and make him sneeze with a solution, and plug his nose when sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and prop up the ear at the top.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times it comes out through this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out, then administer an extract with sharp tweezers, of which this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it pops out with the tweezers, that is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then administer an extract at the thin end of a small needle;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not come out with that, then make a brass rod and insert the head of the rod into the ear canal firmly, and plug around the rod with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the rod;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then treat it again later, because often it comes out again as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come out in this way, then grab some grit with your fingers, and put some instrument that is suitable for doing this, and put a little cotton around it;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the grit onto the stone or whatever it is, and push it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not pop out with all the things we have said, then you should quickly split the ear so that pus and blood come out, and a spasm.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the way to split it is that you first make the patient bleed from the head, and draw out blood according to his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear up, and make a small slit at the root of the ear where the grease depends;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and make the incision as deep as a moon, so that you reach the stone, then squeeze it hard with your finger and suck vigorously with your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if there are grains within that are swollen, then administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, then administer the spatumile tenve subtly according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and bring about incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this if you think the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it with delicate tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore in the water that runs into the ear, the patient should use scent to cause sneezing first, and fill the ear with soft cotton.Quant il distend l’oreille si que li muque se distende, met a l’entree de l’oreille, es deux costez del garnement, quelque oile violete et suc, si com nos avons dit; et s’il ne peut venir fuer par ceste manier, si covient le faire estracter as pinceures subtilz.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on the affected ear itself.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out by itself, that is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, then take many stones according to the length of your fingers, thin and light, and heat them slightly in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and cut a hole in the patient's ear, and pierce through from the other side of his foot, and pierce another stone onto the stone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not cease to push this stone through the other until all the water comes out, and so it will flow out entirely;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see that it is taking hold, push one end of the reed into the ear and heat the other end in fire until the most painful reed is burned;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then do this with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In extracting a foreign object from an animal, if it is small in size like a tick or similar, remove it as we have described in the section on division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large enough to be felt, use forceps for extraction;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment is not helping, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if you see no worms, then treat it with subtle pincers, and if they don't appear, then take the skin of a hen's egg.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is tight below and loose above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	Then insert the most slender end into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suck gently on the egg;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	do this frequently until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they don't come out, then stop up the ear with cotton as I have said in the section on stones;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they don't come out as we have described, then administer the distillations that the ancients have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them in the section on distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and medications into the ear with all this equipment, so that it is shaped as you see it:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And let there be tubes of silver or bronze beneath the small holes and above for distillation;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to push into the distillation within the instrument of bronze well made for this purpose, and if you see take a razor and wrap cotton around the point neatly;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you want of your medications into the canal, and let the canal be in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then put within the razor all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled into the canal of the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and let him feel the pain within, and let the distillation be heated by fire so that it is distilled into the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and make sure it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the cleaning of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without an opening in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and the same thing happens in houses through a blockage of the ear, or from pus born within the ear, and this blockage sometimes bursts open in the ear, if one cannot see it;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes there is a slight discharge from the opening, which one can see quite clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	When it bursts open without being seen, it is a sign of a serious condition in many cases, and when one can see it, you should put the patient's ear to the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:si li pertus de l’oreille est em par
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the lining exposed, and the hole in the eardrum is visible, then this is how it should be treated:et s’il n’est pas em parfont, tu mets l’oreille au soleil, et la oevre a tot cest
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be sharp and pointed at both ends, so that it does not pierce the ear.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the operation is on the cartilage of the ear, hold it with small forceps and cut gently until all the cartilage is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the growths are deep in the ear, take a thin, small razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the operation where the patient feels great pain in his ear, pierce gently and be careful not to cut the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then insert a tent into the ear according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this for several days until the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder over with ground vitriol;
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear is swollen, it is necessary to pull out the tent and insert another tent moistened with cerotum made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, take a sponge and dip it in cold water, and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies which stop the bleeding that come from distilling treatments.
de la char des papieres	from the ash of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This is a description of a treatment for hair that is damp and tangled. The instructions are to use tweezers and pinches to straighten it out from the roots, and then cut off the ends with a spatulum.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then apply powdered vitriol to the area.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	If there is no scabs, then cauterize it with a thin lens-shaped cautery iron, and after the incision, apply honey.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	Many times they grow back, as nothing remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, the roots are burned and they do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times, a substance that looks like gravel forms on the hair, and this is what the disease is called "hail," as it is a collection of thick moisture above and below the hair.
li ovraiges est telz:	the works are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	take care that hail does not strike from both sides simultaneously, and this is an easy thing to understand.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	then make a large cut, then very gently peel the skin from each side, and then grasp it with forceps and stitch it up.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot sew it closed without piercing the paper a little, do not worry, as this will not harm the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the wound is large, stitch it closed and treat it until it is healed;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not force it shut, as the natural healing process will restore and close it quickly.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the hematoma is descending into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper inside out and grasp it with forceps and stitch it up, pressing from both sides;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is removed by incision, this does not matter;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the blisters are cut, wash with salty water and treat the area with a poultice until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Eczema is a fat that is woven into the paper-thin skin of children and the elderly, and it is very painful. They get pus in the mornings and cannot look at sunlight because their tears flow freely.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	This is why they sleep with their mouths open and snore, because the skin around their eyes is wet and swollen, covering the eczema that appears in the corners of their eyes.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place between your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the way to treat this is for the patient to put his head on the lap of the healthy person;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	And then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, then place it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	And press with your fingers on both sides so that the exirnach is gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	Then make in the center of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit that is not wider than the wound one makes to let blood out of a vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	And cut through the skin down to the bone until you reach the exirnach;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And in many cases, exirnach comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white grease.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Therefore, take it all out with a piece of cloth squeezed between your fingers, turning your hand to the right and left until it is spread out;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and be careful not to cut into the fissure, or you will reach all the way to the eye and injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the pus does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then gently widen the fissure slightly until it opens;
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then extract it as we have said, then moisten the area with water-soaked cloth and apply pressure to stop the bleeding, and finally bind it up tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are men who grind salt and place it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal it until it is cured.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes to the place, then treat it with cooling poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hair from papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow from paper, other than the natural color, and they turn grey, then they harm the eyes, and cause various diseases such as inflammation of the eyelids, softness of the paper, and white film, until it leads to the destruction of the eyes;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and there are three ways to treat this:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	either by cauterization with fire, or with medicine according to what is written in the chapter on cauterization, and it can be done by incision and stitching, or with tweezers, according to what I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	You must place the patient's head in your lap, then return the paper to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is converted, that is good.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	If not, put an awl through the thread.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and it is to be at the edge of the paper where the hairs grow along these hairs, and draw the thread across to the other side of the paper, and return it to the razor.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	Then they make an incision under the paper, under the hairs, all the way to the great artery, just to the small one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Then pull out the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then mark on the paper a figure in the shape of an inchworm, as the fuel of myrtle, and still according to the quantity you see rising up through the divided paper.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if to one who needs it, he applies a large amount of the paper according to how soft the paper is;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make the spatumile over the 2 lines you have signed, and start from the large armpit up to the small one;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the slits be near the natural hair in the thickness of a hair root, then pierce the skin in one of the 2 angles of the heart, then peel it all off;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then join the 2 lips with a single thread of fine wool through an eye needle, and stop the bleeding, and dry up the excess threads over the 2 eyelids with any sticky substance if you see fit to do so;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, then don't worry about it, and leave the stitches and threads for 3 or 4 days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then dress the wound without suturing with dry and constricting things, for paper lifts up suddenly from the wound and its closing, but sutures are painful (as the ancients say), and this is a work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and you should mark the paper with a shape that is also like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at three inches removed according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what is on top into small pieces evenly according to the shape that is there:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the tweezers and the object is not straight, then take a needle with a thread and weave it through the shape;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and weave another thread through the larger pore, and the second thread through the smaller, and bring the threads together evenly between your fingers;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have marked, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound by suturing, and dress it until it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerotem and similar soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes the hairs of the paper are converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if you should use what we have said about the incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of bones is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and is to convert the paper and insert it inside according to what I have said, then make two bones by art, and two subtle strings as long as the paper and the spatulum is wide;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut as two heads on either side where you hold the strings;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble one and the other subtly above what is on top of the paper of the eye, and straining the two bones from the two formed parts;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let it remain thus for a few days, and the skin that is stretched will die and shrivel and fall off as it dries.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it takes time, if the wound has some strength, then treat the scar until it heals;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is sewn up and the paper is lifted, the hairs will no longer be pricked;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the II chains that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The work is such that you thread a fine needle, and put in it a fine silk thread;et li bout esguisies, et li passe au traittement des ovraiges sus la piere ou sur les saiges, et ad leu les guarisit.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then assemble the heads and tie them together deftly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long;et si adonques covient que tu le remees en la dislocation du chie, car il ne peuit demorer ains doit ad les remuement de l’ovraige qu’il revint.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then place in the wound another fine silk thread, and tie the ends of the thread together.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then put the patient's head into your lap;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and be in the shade so that the work is clearly seen, for this is a fine and delicate work. Then insert the needle into the skin at the root of the hair, and pierce through the paper slowly while pulling the thread through above the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then pull out the hair to the surface of the skin, and put in that hair into the wound, whether there is one, two, three, or more hairs;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then pull your hand back so that the hair comes out through the skin and paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then pull at the thread that you have placed in the wound from underneath, until the wound comes out through the opening above and you can see it with your eye.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	then you will pull out the hair and thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the skin grows over it.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are short, accompany them with a long hair from the eyebrows, and let it grow with that one, until it is grown out and then you can pluck it out.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the eye pustule
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called 'aleacrati' or warts comes in the eye, there are two ways in which it can manifest.
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One is natural, and one is supernatural.La natureile est qu’alques fois li ommes ayent en lor oeuil un porriture
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	The natural way is that sometimes people have a wart in their eye. And the treatment for this is to split the wart, open up its edges, place linen tenters inside it, and keep it clean until it heals.et li natureil est que alques fois li ommes ayent en lor oeuil un porriture qui soit natureile, c’est asses que la soudure se fende et la peau s’eslieve et ne soit point brusee, si
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and you must not use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but work with softening things, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and rosewater or elderflower and flaxseed are cooked, and onions fried in some oil, and wrap it in a tent, and treat it this way.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the essence of your treatment is to ensure that it does not harden according to its previous shape;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these procedures that we have described are not remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to its previous shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from the pus that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is below and which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way to do this is to take a needle and thread it with a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from one earlobe to the other, so that the thread comes out in both ears;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then the hair is pulled up to the top of the needle, and the cap is placed over the broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if not, then take a razor and place it in the slit, and turn the paper over, and make two slits along the inside of the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the edges of the two slits be the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has the form «I griesche»;
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove this hair, according to the amount that its sides are cut under, from that which follows the paper, then join the two separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with what we have said about the softening remedies, and with poultices, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a split or stitch or cautery, then you must make a clean split under the hair of the eyelids, and according to what is written above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then split between the two lips of the tent, as I have said.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one must do the work according to the form of the disease, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares tools with all his might so that he may bring the form back to its natural shape.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the disease itself, according to what it needs in terms of work and instruments, in many different arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	Sudden movement of the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this soudure happens to men in such a way that the papery part above is separated from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor under the papery part and lift it upward;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and stretch them as pins until you reach the тонкие, not too pointed or too sharp, so that the patient does not feel pain and the тонкие do not hurt the eye;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and make your incision lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and all of this assembly is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is a salty water, and they lift it with fresh water, and bandages;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and place on the eye wool dampened with egg;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day, use a bandage and soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	You know that the nail is in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	it is nervous and resembles a hard cyst, and another that is not nervous, but resembles frozen white moisture, which, when touched with iron and pinched, cannot be pierced by anyone;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both appear from the great tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover the entire eye and all sight and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the way of the incision is that the patient puts his head to you, then you work on them.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lightly hold the eyelid in your hand, then use your fingernails like tiny pincers, and stretch it upwards;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and thread it with horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the needle's point slightly and insert it into the eyelid, and pierce all the way through the needle, and tie the eyelid with a thread and stretch it upwards, and scrape along the edge of the eyelid that follows the tear duct to the eye socket gently and with small forces, and leave the natural channel for tears, so that by the incision the body's tears do not leak;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes only the nail at the finger or toe is affected, and on the thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then there is scaling all over the scrotum, from which comes the form of this disease.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And be careful that the scrotum does not touch and break the flesh-colored membrane, and that the foreskin is not pierced;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, put a little crushed vitriol in the eye, and the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it as needed until it is healed.Et se li gautes de l’oil sont troves ou l’incision a este feite, si li traie le sang par la fente, et li
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the eyelids are swollen where the incision was made, and the thread draws blood from the wound, and the
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then operate on the eye of the patient, and take the spatulum lightly, poking gently according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And gently press the nail on top, and if you see that it does not lessen and the inflammation gets worse, then drop from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litarge and red copper ore, ground up, and stop up the eye until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then restart the other work according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin again the work as before, until it is healed.Et se il y aveit aposteme froid, adonques cure l’aposteme par le chaus; et si tu vois qu’elle ne voulent point arder, si distille en l’oil du vin de groseille, et du coliere dou ver, et du litargire, et du sal amoniac; et si la chose n’est pas trop chaude, si peit de ta bouche.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid is harmful to the eye through great damage, then suspend it on the lid, and cut off a part and not all of it, so that no tear fluid enters;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then drop into the eye red collar made of litarge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	In some men, a red lump sometimes grows from their testicles, covering the scrotum and constricting it on top of the papers, and it looks like a rose from a balcony.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the treatment is for the patient to put his head on something firm, then he works on the lump, and then he twists it into knots appropriate for that purpose, and holds it firmly in place.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then he shaves the first lump, going all around at the base, and you must be careful not to cut the eye during this treatment.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and make an incision at the bottom of the testicle, as we have described in the section on incisions for nails, and with small tools you remove the pus, as the diagram in this chapter shows.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the incision is complete and all the pus has been removed, apply a mixture of egg white and red vitriol to the eye, and then cover it with cotton soaked in egg white so that the abscess remains warm.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it persists, and the hot pus overcomes the blood, and you doubt that it is a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that soothe the hot abscess;
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work until it is healed, and thus you will treat any eye that is affected in this way.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	However, you should still lighten the treatment for each weak eye in the natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and in accidental work, with iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	So are red veins that are covered over the eye, and tolerate the sight of its work and weaken the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	So therefore, first you must look at the eye, and see if it is soft, swollen, and free of any other disease except for the ulcer;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then treat it in this way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head in yours, then open the veins all around gently according to your wisdom, and make the openings subtle twice according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And two edges in .I. body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then we press these veins gently, and let the blood flow out an hour after another, until you see the veins recede from the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and be careful not to cut the eye on the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you don't go beyond these veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the disease.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you do not have the power to collect it all in that hour, then make an ointment for the eye of soothing things for eye pain, and let it be for several days until the pain is eased and there is a hot abscess formed, then start again according to what is before until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	He calls these "arissati" fistulas:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you treat it with cautery and medicine with fire according to what I have already said, and it is not healed, then there is a lump in it that you must cut open over the abscess, where it should be, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the decay and blackness, then return to the instrument from which this form comes;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of iron into a sharp chisel, and pointed like a file as it is in the current form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it on the decayed bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little so that you know the decay has been removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this sometimes, then restore the place with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the sores are healed, and hair grows from it, and the body of the boil is healed, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not open up again and no bad thing happens, you may know that he is healed;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	if not, there is only one other thing to do, which is to open the fistula at its narrow opening according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and you must uncover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines; and when it is uncovered, take an iron tool according to this form, and let the head of the tool have three edges, and let the shaft be tapered to a point as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place the tool on the bone next to the fistula, and move your hand away from the eye, then return the tool repeatedly until it pierces the bone, and the patient will feel it through his nail if he holds his hand over his nail;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place with dry medicine as I have shown you, and when the flesh has grown and hardened, look at the matter with your fingernail;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a minor issue for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye:
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eye is fully opened, and there is no disturbance or lessening, then you should bind the patient's eye;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then cleanse the eye, then apply leeches or a hot iron without burning to suck it out, then apply to the eye an ointment made of honey and aloes and incense and myrrh, and then bind it up, and put on bandages and linen;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the bandages is such that you fold soft linen several times, and then put one on top of another according to the amount that the eye needs;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then we stretch it with a hard bandage tightly, and reapply the cupping glasses to draw out without hurting.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the cupping glasses and leave the area stretched day and night, and if the ligature softens, then you must stretch it tightly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the eye iyile, that is good;
se ce non;	if not,
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	reapply the ointment and the bandages, and the ligature, and the cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the rupture of a woven cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruption occurs in the woven web, then it opens, and there comes out of the paper like grains of resin, and is terrible to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it covering, the work is such that you push a needle into the root of the part below up to the ceiling of the part above; then push another needle where there is a double thread from the eye socket;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and have them pierce, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then thread the double thread through the hole and tie one end around the tissue, and tighten it well; then withdraw the needle and place the other eye of the needle in the moistened wound;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it be until the thread cuts into the tissue, then treat the wound with comforting things until it is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and sometimes the wound is constrained by the cloth on each side in a circle, so that it may be healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes are pushing out, then pierce them with a sharp spatula which comes from the corner of the eye, and correct the white bulging and push in the eyes, and enter immediately;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then withdraw it as soon as it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than an inflammation which has gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water;It may be white or yellow, and it is hot,
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of the appearance of the work is such that you cause the patient to sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the bow come above your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then it is fixed, and the light is dimmed, and the patient sees things as he used to;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not go down, know that it is acute, and if the movement of the bow is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	have the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula and gently press on the white of the eye, along the extension of the conjunctiva with the white of the eye and the cornea, until the bow comes out;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is out, drop into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or hot water or fenugreek boiled and strained through honey, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have learned the appearances of diseases in their varieties, and what is needed to pierce them.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	act according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light to avoid the sun, and press his healthy eye tightly while keeping it still.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then, hold the paper over the eye with your left hand if the eye is on the left, and with your right hand if it is on the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Take in your right hand, if the eye is on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then, place the tip of the instrument, which is called "almagda", alongside the edge of the eyeball at the white part of the eye near where the tear duct is located. Push the instrument gently and firmly until it penetrates the eyeball, feeling for when the almagda reaches the hollow space inside;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the measure of the alchemy way be at the bottom of the space measure which is from the prunelle until the end of the nourishment.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and that is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horny tissue, then place the instrument where the water is and then press it down a little at a time.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water is coming out now, then the patient can see his own instrument and himself in front of him.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After you wait a little, and if the water rises up the second way, push it down with the instrument, and when it is stuck in and does not rise, gently pull out the alchemy while turning your hand a little bit at a time.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	Then put in some water with a little sealing wax, and leave the eye inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then insert an eyeball soaked in rose oil and abundance of egg white, and bind it with clean eye-oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are from our time, put on comfrey crushed with an abundance of egg white.Et si li aigue ne descend pas la seconde voie, puis remette l’oil de l’autre costé, et met par defuer sus leu de l’eyelet une piece de lainne moillie en oile roset; et lie almain avec l’oil sain.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And so just pierce the conjunctiva, and do not go in too deep, but make the hole subtle, then insert alchemy as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient to lie on his back in a dark place;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and he must be restrained from all movement, and eat light foods, and not move his head or to the right or left, and be tied according to his condition for three days;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then untie him in the same dark house, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and you must not do this during the hour of the procedure or after the incision now, but you must reduce it, so that the water rises rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	if a warm abscess comes, remove the bandage before the seventh day and use that which soothes the abscess;
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is quiet, he uncovers his face and puts on an eye-patch to protect his eyes from the light, and then he can go into that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then he leaves the house little by little, and returns to his normal state;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no student should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us from Spain who said that in his country they made almucadars, which they used to draw out water, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about them in ancient books;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps it is a new thing.Et si le poignent est de la guirbe ou de la teste, il conv
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the similarities of the forms of almucadars, so that those who do not know them may see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they should be made of proper bronze:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the ends of these be of the same subtlety, and the hindmost have four points.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart above the diaphragm
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	There are times when various types of warts grow on the body, some resembling scorpions with many feet.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Some have warts that are raised and a dark color, while others have warts that are flat and the color of skin.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	For those warts which are flat and not raised, you should have the patient sit in your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nostrils, and breathe onto the warts, and drive them out.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Then, hold the spatulum firmly with one hand as you know that the wart has been completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if anything remains which you cannot scrape away, open it with the sharp end of a straw, so that nothing is left;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if there is an abscess, pierce it as it should be;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize it until the pus is dried out and all the corrupt matter has been removed; then pour in vinegar or wine and water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the nose works, and moisture comes up to the palate, you will know that it is healthy;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not pass through as it should, you will know that there is corrupt matter in the bone above, and so the instruments will not come to cut it out;
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	therefore you must insert a thread of linen that is somewhat thick, and let it be tied by the hand, with a knot between each nostril, no more than a finger's width apart;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and let the patient hold the thread in his nose to its full extent, and pull it through the nose into the mouth until he feels an odor;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many children do this in school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes from the nose in one hand and the head that comes from the mouth in the other, and twist them one after the other while standing as we do when spinning yarn.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the thread has corrupted the flesh, then pull the thread, wipe off the blood and soak the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put in the nose a plug of cotton wool for several days until it is healed, and if there is need for dry medicine, use it.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument for cleansing the nose, through which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it can be of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a candle, and guide it likewise.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you wish to make a closed candle, then the instrument should be filled for purging the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and hold it to the head to keep it steady when one heats the oil or any other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart above the diaphragm
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease arises in the head from the nose, called "telul", which grows and becomes large, so that it is an ugly sight to behold;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this reason one should cut it at the beginning and remove all of it, then place upon it the cautery or burning medicine;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if one delays in cutting it until it becomes large, then take care, for if it is hard, of foul colour, and poor in sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	do not touch it with iron, for it is an encrusted abscess, for when one cuts it, great mischief comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is from a soft touch, not from a flow of color, and you see that one can completely cover it, then empty the patient and cover without fear, and treat the area with dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the heart is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilage openings, it is beneficial to some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, when this happens to someone, one must see if the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then bring the two lips together with a stitch, and then treat it until it is healed;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are torn on both sides, one must scrape all the parts of their skin until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a stitch, hold them tight, and powder dragon's blood over powder, and ground incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster over the powders, and let it stay until it comes off on its own, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of the cautery is as follows: assemble the solution.
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have already informed you.
des apostemes des levres	of lip abscesses
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Within the lips there occur hard abscesses, resembling peas in size, both smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	therefore you must turn the lips inside out, and slit them on each side, and take them with tweezers and squeeze in every part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply vitriol powder to the wound, until the bleeding stops;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it with garlic, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of gum swelling
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times there grow on the gums a swelling called by the ancients 'albus'.;
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	You should hold it with tweezers and squeeze it at its root, letting the pus or blood run out;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then put on vitriol powder, or other restraining and drying powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if the vein bleeds again after the incision, and it happens many times, then cauterize it a second time:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not bleed after cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of fistulas to cover.
des sordens	of the eyes, and to the
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they are gathered at the top of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, ugly and rough scabs;s’il est en l’un et l’autre chief de la dent, si le chef prend la couleur du fer:
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and if it is at both ends of the tooth, its tip takes on the color of iron: and sometimes teeth are black, yellow, and green, as far as the corruption reaches the gums, and the teeth stink;si le coruption vient entre la gencive et li dent si que la gencive
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	if the corruption comes between the gum and the tooth so that the patient sits in your hands, and his jaw is in your holy hand, examine the teeth or scabs until nothing remains;et si la corruption est entre li dent et la gencive si que la gencive soit eschaude, et la dent froide:
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and so it is with darkness and greenness, and yellowing and other discolourations, until they have healed.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if one removes what is at the root of it, that is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not, then one should begin again on the second and third day, until everything has healed.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And know that teeth require various instruments to reset, according to what the work demonstrates to you, for the forceps with which one resets the teeth have a different shape from those used to reset teeth inside.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	You should have these shapes and others among your tools.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	When you treat a tooth for its pain, you should take as long as you can, for one must not hurry this.Et se li dent sont si apaisiez et la dolour si desraiz que li dent n’ont plus grant dolor, s’il sunt entre les dens, adonc leve li dent
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is a very high substance just until one has no excuse to pull.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is compelled to pull, you must be certain of your teeth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in the tooth of Saint, and pulls out the good tooth;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and yet the pain does not leave him because of this, as long as the bad teeth remain, because we have already tried to do it with those healers;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are quite sure of the tooth that hurts, then you should scrape around the tooth all around with a strong spatulum to push back the gums from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then pull it with your fingers or with fine tweezers gently and gently until it is well loosened, then grip the tweezers tightly;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the patient be in a seated position between your knees, holding him so he doesn't move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	Then extract the tooth firmly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the teeth are broken and eaten away, then you must fill the holes with linen.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you hold it tightly with tweezers so that it does not break while being held.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and one must work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful that you don't break it, or part of it remains, and the pain returns worse than before because of the root's sharp edge.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And be wary that you do not act like the ignorant healers who, in their haste and boldness, sometimes break the jaw, and do not follow what we have described:
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but sometimes bring about great illness through the roots that remain, or break the jaw, as we have often seen;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is drawn, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply crushed vitriol to the socket;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if this does not work, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of instruments, with which one pulls out teeth, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not break when you pull the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be made of large pieces so that they don't bend during pulling, and be made of good iron, and be serrated to hold the gums.
de la racine des dens	from the root of teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the socket, one should put wet cotton on it for a day or two until the socket softens, and then one uses tweezers called "algefri" which look like a pair of tongs, to pull out the tooth.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should be made like a file inside, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out with all these tweezers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and insert the instrument called 'althali', that is, forceps, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And it should be strong and thick so that it doesn't break, and if the root comes out with it, all the better.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if not, then use all the instruments, whose forms are described below:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And let one assist with this instrument which has .ij. tips, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools which are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let this instrument be outside so that it does not break, and know that many dental instruments are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the skilled master craftsman finds by himself his instrument, according to what his work and the disease demonstrates, for there are many diverse diseases where the ancients did not teach about an instrument; if it doesn't break through the jaw or other bones, but protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, so here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be thick and strong to hold the bone, so that it doesn't slip away, but he can hold and remove it;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is protuberance in the bone, and it is small, then he should use this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not according to nature's course, and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, you must know whether the tooth is growing correctly, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be pushed or filed:
adonques lou raie;	then pull it out;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is growing with the tooth, then take this instrument, whose shape is like a small beak, and made of iron sharpened at its point;
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the gum recedes little by little day by day because of the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that one can be filed down, then file it with a file such as this, according to its shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	it is as sharp as the file used to make needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and gently file the tooth a little bit at a time, so that it does not move until it breaks;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then smooth it at the end with a rasp until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or impede speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth is loose:
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the tooth in front loosen, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what he eats without defecating, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, but it does not help.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if they should be restrained by a gold wire, for silver wires turn green and rot, but gold never moves.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and the wire should not be too thin or too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and tie it double between two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more of them, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then start the binding again from where you began, and tighten your hand gently but firmly until it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and hold your fire cautery to the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the teeth of the file with tongs, and assemble them, and bind them between the healthy tooth and the tooth that is not, and put it in so it does not bite the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the file breaks, then hold it with another file;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it stays and serves throughout its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the II healthy teeth, and the II rotten ones, as you can see;
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, one replaces it in its place, little by little, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and one who is not wise and suffering should not meddle in this; sometimes one makes the form of a tooth from a calf's bone, and puts it in the place where there is a defect, and holds it as we have said, and it stays and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the wound in the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this vein, which comes from under the tongue, where nature places it, causes one to be born like that.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or through an accidental wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and place his head in your lap, and lift up his tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then grab the nerved vein firmly, as widely as you can, so that the tongue is loosened from its place, and if there is a lump or wound there, and it is from a sudden injury, then cut the vein with your fingernail;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and be careful that the cut is not too deep, so as not to reach the artery underneath;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you are done, raise the level of the sick person's head with rose water and garlic, or with cold water, then place a tent made of linen underneath the tongue;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and the patient's scabies every night, so that the sores cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if there is bleeding, apply powdered vitriol to the site.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the blood stops, then cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this purpose.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat it further until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see that it has turned red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel anything, do not touch it, for it is a ulcer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is inclining towards a pustule, and there is moisture in it, then open it with a needle, and drain it from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the bleeding stops with your treatment, apply powdered vitriol until it is stanched, then return to your treatment until you have removed everything.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then raise him up from bed and chair, and treat him with other treatments until he is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes there come into the throat warts which are called 'godath', and they are properly called the tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take heed:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron.si le gosier est delicat et li tros, si la remede de vinger adonques il faillet; s’il est grant, si
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if the throat is delicate and sore, then it needs the remedy of the finger; if it is large, then it must not be touched with iron, also for fear of bleeding.if it is red and the root is swollen, then do not touch it with iron either:
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it be until it bursts, and then you will part it, or else it will break on its own;et li sang qui vieni de la root a l’esguier, si tu le remuieras, et il fuit adés et se rompre
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if they are of a white color, and the roots are fine, then have your instrument ready to cut, but first check that the abscess is cool and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, and let his head be in your shade, and let him open his mouth and the assistant grip his jaw between their hands, and press the tongue down from under so that this is the shape:
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and it should be made of silver or thin bronze like a little knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Then you press the tongue against this instrument and see the abscess, then take the needle and insert it into the pistachio nut, and pull it out above as far as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and draw something from the threads with it, then cut the instrument into the shape that resembles a scythe;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	but their heads are curved and hooked, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, cover it with tongs, of which the shape is like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And some are serrated on one side, and smooth on the other;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have cut one of the testicles, then cut the other in the same way, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with water, or with the bark of pomegranates that have been cooked, or with myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bandage him until he is healed;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two testicles, so cut them out just like the two testicles.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	I once treated a woman for an abscess that had formed inside her throat; it was a small one,
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and the throat was almost completely closed, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, nor eat or drink, and she would have died if it continued for another day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had become so swollen that it had forced out two hairs from the nose holes.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	So I immediately inserted a hook into one nostril, then pulled the worm out, along with a large amount of phlegm;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I did the same in the other nostril, opened her mouth and pressed her tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after that, I inserted a hook into these abscesses and scraped out some of the pus, and only a little blood came out;
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and so the passage in the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut this abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscess re-formed and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large again;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I taught him and cauterized it inside his throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	so that it will not grow;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I left those parts, and God did what He would with him after me.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the tear sac descends towards the eye, and it is swollen and it is long, then it is called «perpendicular»;
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is fat and round, then it is called «eye».;
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the eye's abscess is pacified, and it is thin, then you must cut it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and if it is round and not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and if it is blood red or light brown or black, then you must avoid cutting it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger in doing so.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it according to the way that I have described, its whiteness and length, you must make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned earlier;Adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the needle into the vein, and pull it through, and cut off one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two testicles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you must not cut anything further than the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	because if you cut too much, it will harm the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, follow what we said in the incision of the two testicles, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear from covering, then you should use the cautery of the sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is for acute fever.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And let the patient put his head into your lap, and then press his tongue against the instrument that we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and mix it with warm vinegar, neither too thick nor too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and use this tool to create a mold of the shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And it has a hair on its head where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument with all the medicine into the vein;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva and mucus run from his mouth due to the medication inside, so that it does not descend into his throat and lungs;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the ulcer for about half an hour, until you see it softening and the bites of the medication calming down;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument completely with the cotton on top into the ulcer;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry and fall off after 4 or 5 days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to renew the cautery of the medicine, then renew it, and after the cautery wipe around the ulcer with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine.Et se li mordications sont trop grans et qu’ilz ne puent apier, si le mets a tout la medicine sus l’uve, et le presse tant que tu le vois nercie;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him drink cold water, and let him gargle until he is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision or cautery.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calaminth and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and avens and similar herbs, and combine all or some of them in a pot, and add garlic, and let them boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well glazed with strong clay, and once the pot is made he should spread the mixture on it according to this method.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And let one of the lips be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye is deadened.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	Afterwards he should repeat this often until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of the hot abscess, for various things can happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not make it too hot when treating an abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and place within the handle an egg-yolk, so that the mouth of the instrument is not too hot for the patient;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the yolk will not let the vapors overwhelm the patient's mouth, and it is a beneficial treatment all around.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Often there is a fishbone or some other object stuck in the throat;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so you should try to remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the instrument in sunlight until you dislodge the object.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	For what you cannot remove and remains stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	perhaps the object will come out with the vomiting.Si li viande ne s’est mie cuite as en la gorge, covient que tu le faices
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient should swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of bread, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and attach a thread to the sponge and then swallow it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it reaches the spot, it will stick, and then you can pull it out;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it doesn't come out as we have said, take a piece of salt plaster according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And the instrument should be bent at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and the head should be held up;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or it will choke, nor push anything into the bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And you must make sure that the patient swallows the instrument so that it reaches the spot where the object is lodged;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if the bowels move downward, or he pulls them outward equally with all his strength, until they are forced out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Sometimes medicine is given to the patient, as I have said in the section on remedies, to treat the disease.
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And if that does not help, then examine the throat of the patient in the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument I have described to you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it out with a small hook or fine tweezers suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a curved cane and insert it into the throat of the patient, then heat the tip of the cane, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take some cold water in a glass, open his mouth and pour it in without swallowing, moving his jaw often with your hand.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And as soon as he feels the water, let him vomit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not come out as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument I have described for smoking out the throat.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for he will vomit without hurting himself.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of the fume is that you put burning charcoal in a container with a perforated lid, and the instrument's head goes through the hole.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then you blow the smoke into it, and the patient places the instrument's head in his mouth, closing it so that no smoke escapes but goes to the blood vessels.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And the blood will drop immediately, and if it doesn't, repeat the fume treatment many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	Let the patient be thirsty, eat salted and dry foods, and drink no water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Then it will be necessary for it to go out through this method of treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the instrument used to treat the blood vessels is similar in shape, when one can see it, to bent tongs designed to go into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and resembles a sow's mouth, and has the roughness of sandpaper, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go.
et vez ci la forme:	And see the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Mouths of similar abscesses are, according to the recollections that come hereafter from one and another in this book, and they are diverse in penetration and size;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and there are two ways in which the first is in its own appearance, and that of what it contains moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the places where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and the abscesses of fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in action.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if one must not pierce abscesses until the bowels are dead according to their completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and some which one must pierce when they are crusty, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses near joints.Et c’est ains qu’on dist que les apostemes son meures quan il sont creuzes et vides; car quan il son creuzes selonc lor acomplissement, si doivent ilz mouoir et ne puet mie rien plus demourer en lor
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	Because when abscesses develop near the joints and are left untreated until they are pus-filled, it is likely that the ligaments and nerves of the joint will become damaged, causing contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where the abscess is near a main limb, and if you delay the piercing until it is mature, it will harm the main limb.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or where it is near the fundament, then one must pierce it in such a way that it drains completely.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And one should not pierce an abscess without its digestion being completed, except for the one that is by the fundament, which can be allowed to drain a little and extend inwardly, so that a fistula may result.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and not heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And one should know the hour of piercing an abscess that is mature according to its accomplishment, and that is when the pain has subsided, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the softening and hardening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and you must pierce the vein where it depends most on the abscess, and where there is movement.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	Let the piercing be in the longest part of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints, and on nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	For those who bend, depending on the limb involved.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in fleshy places, it is better to wait until after digestion is complete before piercing them, as we have said.Et quant il est delez lou membre principal, et tu ne veillies le perforer tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, fuers que il soit meurez entor, si nuira au membre principel; et est grant dolur a celui qui le por; et li maux est plusors foiz perilluz.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before this, the venom will flow through the body, and it will be filled with much filth;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and perhaps harden its lips and depths.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess that should be punctured according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you must treat small abscesses with small incisions;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large incisions, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where one should cut the skin, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when he has become as soft as a cloth, and is lifeless, one should then do what one does to blisters.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if they have split into three angles and are like the blister on the miter tree, as with abscesses on the fingers:
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are others where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuts.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those without a head, like a superficial sweat blister, you should pierce directly through;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and when the abscess is large and has drawn a lot of pus, and you pierce it, then do not draw all the pus in that hour, but only a portion. ;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then stop up the abscess until the next day and then draw some more out the next day;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this many times until all of the pus is drawn out.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	If the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying child, or a small child, or an old man enfeebled by age.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the pus sometimes jumps out with the release of the blister, and the patient might die without your realizing it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore, handle this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, wash the wound, and check if the wound of the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it's a clean cut, apply bandages made of linen or old cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it's a large abscess and there are many openings, you should place a tent in each one so that they touch each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have cut into the skin of the abscess and it has bled, you should fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth shavings without moisture, and let it be for a third of the day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the bone, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and ease, and wet the cloth, and place it over the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the bleeding persists, if it is administered control and treatment, and the powders that I have described in this book with my own hands, and if it is in the winter season, and the abscesses are very nervous, then you should put wet tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in the spring, and the abscesses are fleshy, then you should place wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for a third of a day, as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then open the abscess, wash it out and treat it as it should be until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this is what one must know generally about the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or I have told you how one must go before the treatment of abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the head come small abscesses, and they are caused by people who wear hats, just as the ears of a chicken are, and there are many variations of this type.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some with fat and such that also have moisture as well as pus;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And there are some which are hard and stony in texture, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act contrary to them.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the body is that you should test with every instrument called "trocar", whose form comes afterwards, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they open it from above and draw out the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture has been drained, one should scorch it without leaving anything behind that contains the moisture, for it will return again if nothing is left behind.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and then cleanse again what is remaining from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then begin again with the cotton, as before, the second and third day, until you know well that nothing remains overnight;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess contains pus, then open it according to this form, lengthwise:
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and he will pour out his bile, and cut away all around it, and use all his skill to draw the poison out from under the skin where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery acts contrary, then do as I have told you above.Et demourera en celi lieu i jus de ceste incision, si laisera li sang couler tant qu’il soit sanz venin;
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this for a stone-abscess, cutting and treating it as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the stone-abscess is lighter, because they are full of blood.Et si li artere ne fuit pas, si mettés li chié sus li berlingot, et li muesche a li costez, et li sienge au bout de la verge, et li vachez a l’autre cap; et prendes une fiole d’or et une de verre, et le piez ou il gist, et mettes li cief sus li berlingot, et le corps sus li piez, et les piés sus li sienge, et li col sus li vachez.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if some of these abscesses have no moisture in them, and the chief of them was on an old woman's head:Et li chiés et les costes et les fesses, et le col et la gueute: si fai I chié par incision sus lor nassance;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and the shoulders and ribs and buttocks and neck and face: in these cases make an incision over their source;I found the abscess just like a hard, rough, white stone, and it could not be broken;Et le corps qui tenoit la piere, et li artere et li veines, et li nervaus,
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if anyone were struck by it, they would be injured just as by a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	For other abscesses coming from the head, especially those that come to the heads of children and to the roots of the ears, the opening should be kept in the most dependent place so that the pus can flow out;
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat them as they should be.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times abscesses come on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body, and they are large, and some are connected to each other.And these that come on the head, and those that come on children, if they have no moisture, and are not broken open, then they are called 'stone-abscesses'. And they cause great pain, and often kill the patient, and sometimes they can be found in the neck, armpit, groin, or elsewhere in the body. They are large and hard like a stone, and if cut open they will bleed profusely just like a wound from a stone.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its coat, like the node and abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and there are many similarities among these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malignant and will not respond to treatment.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	So in the one that you see has a good disposition to touch, and is similar in color to the body, and is not swollen on either side, nor pressing on the nerves of the neck or artery or duct, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	you should cover it from above, and scrape each part, and the two lips of the wound should be stitched together, if necessary, as we have said for abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And pull it gently, little by little, and be sure not to cover the nerve or the vein, and do not use the spatulum or forceps so that the hand does not slip, and do not look too far forward, so that you do not cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cover the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put crushed vitriol or some powder that stops bleeding into the wound, and bind it tight.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And leave it until the abscess is quieted and the wound softens and begins to fester.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is stopped, return to your work, continuing until it is finished.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then examine with your finger if any small scrophules remain; cut them out and clean the wound.Et li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient ad
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, you should not cut into that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall from it without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then dress the wound.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the whole ulcer, you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that no excess remains due to the size of the ulcer.Et si tu troves en la plaie grant quantite de sangue qu’il ne se peut estaincher a ton ovraige, si covient que tu metes li sur la plaie un panne, et le tiens fort; puis emporte li sang, et laisse li panne adessuz tant qu’il soit estanchié.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	then you must understand how to cover the root of it, and pull it out, and cut it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	For those scrofulae that are superficial, pierce where there is an exit for pus;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce it in the same way as the one described above, and then treat it with poultices and ointments and similar things, so that it corrupts what is left of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is clean, then dress it with ointment that promotes scabs, until it heals.
de squinance	from squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke of incisions in the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with squint, it is necessary to cauterize the opening of the throat called the "epiglottis".
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and this must be done by a professional, because all the veins and the lungs of the sick person are affected by heat in the mouth, or in the throat or in the armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the pormon, one must cover the epiglottis to avoid loss of life due to strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we must make a small cut across it between two circles or four, not in the cartilage but in the amount of the cut through the soft palate.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those places are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the blood vessels are long underneath.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, he must stretch the skin of the throat to the very end, then cut the skin until it reaches the bone;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cauterize with the hot iron, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the artery in the neck that blood flows out through the opening where it is broken, and by the deficiency of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the time has passed that we fear strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart, and sew it up entirely without the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer remedies which promote flesh growth until it is healed.Et s’il advint que la plaie soit trop grande por leuee, si covient ades couper la chair du costé
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be near death, and the deficiency of blood has been restored.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore cut away some of the meat from the side [of the wound] if it is too large to be sutured closed. Then cut open the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe and not suffocate, and he will thus be saved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease had passed, and it passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young lady take a knife and stick it into her throat and cut part of the windpipe;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that blood had come out of it, and that she had not coughed up any phlegm or spittle except what came out through her throat, and the wind was coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until it healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and the young lady had no more than a hoarseness in her voice, and then she returned to her usual state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	therefore I say that one should not fear cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This hernia is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large hernia in the color of a grape, and it is found mostly in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it occurs in two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	natural and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	nor does nature help.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidents are of two kinds: one resembles fat growths, and the other kind resembles an abscess that comes from an artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and one must not use fire that is too hot but only moderate heat, and test and probe throughout the entire opening:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as smooth as fat, and it cannot be opened with any effort, then cut it, just as one cuts a nut, and slice it all the way to its core, if there is none;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and probe carefully throughout, and treat it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.And if you find it as smooth as fat, and it cannot be opened with any effort, then cut it, just as one cuts a nut, and slice it
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many types of growths, and I will describe all their appearances:
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now I must explain the difference between a dislocation and a joint disorder.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that a joint disorder is a continuing fever until the swelling has subsided and the pustules have burst.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then the fever and heat will cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With a dislocation there is no fever, heat, or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to two appearances, either dry or moist, and their colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You should, when you come to the treatment of the nose, test and examine it first with all the instruments called "endoscopic", according to what its shape will allow in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of inquiring into abscesses on the head is to squeeze in the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and then press your fingers gently, gently, until you feel that the pus has broken through the skin, and this should be according to the size of the abscess.Et se tu ne le veois pas percer, retreine ta main et li estrumens, et comence a la parfaicte incision sus l’aposteme, et retreigne ainsii tant qu’il soit bien inciz, puis que tu le traies, puis que il soit si espans comme un poing.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then remove the speculum, and take care not to jump out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs short, whatever its color, they should treat it as I have said for other abscesses:
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the speculum no moisture comes out, know that it is fat, so they should make a cross in it, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape each side and guard the skin where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the nail;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it will return to the body many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if a little remains and the pain is not grave, then employ the wound with some corrosive powders, and press the wound, and put warm healing poultices on it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is large, then cut both lips of the wound, and the cure of that which clogs it.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the pulsation is contrary or else you hasten and employ the place of ground vitriol, and leave it lightly for two or three days until the wound suppurates, and calm the ebullition of blood;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to cover what has been left for a day.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Here are the forms of instruments that pierce, and they are threefold:
grans et moien et petit;	large, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three edges which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles that pierce sorceries, and they are made of brass, iron, or silver, and those with yellow tips are more effective in black pus for surrounding the curves of fistulas;
et sont de III manieres:	and are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large or small, depending on the size of the hole.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the scissors are very similar, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and there are scissors with two curves of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and there are scissors with three curves, and they are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and there are scissors with two curves and scissors with only one curve, and they are of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these tools are sharp, and some only cut one side, so that they do not cut the vein or nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and these tweezers are placed in handles so that the patient does not hurt themselves when opening abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	great, small, and medium, as you can see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and we do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and in similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes another small instrument is made, similar to slices of garlic, according to this shape, with which blood is stopped:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is sometimes placed in the area that heals by stopping the flow of blood from the veins and arteries, and sometimes they are cut according to this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they become corrupt, so that they look like women's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain ugly and swollen, and if anyone wants to cure them, they must cut according to this shape from line b. to line g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then cut into the fat, and fill the wound with healing medicine, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is cured;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast sags down, and is softened due to its size as it does in women, then they make two cuts above, through two similar slits;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	one of which is attached to the other at their end, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to line g;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it sit until it absorbs the remainder and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpit
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	This abscess that comes under the armpit is like a hard scrofula, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus inside the abscess has been drained, employ the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like scrofula, they should proceed as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound becomes pus-filled, they should apply cauterization as we have described earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is open and the skin above it is sewn up, then abscesses often result, and this also happens in the swollen vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows it thus when it is from the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the estrangement;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is from the vein, then there are visible pus and blood;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and in the groin, neck, and many other places, and it is large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, one must avoid using an iron needle, and that which is on top should also be avoided, and with that which is swollen from the artery, they should pierce through the skin above.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then cut the arterioles, and carefully separate the artery from the veins, until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert a needle underneath and pierce it all the way to the other side, and compress the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then puncture the area between the two ties with an introducer, so that the blood flows out and the abscess is drained.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the cure that turns yellow, until the tie falls off.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is due to a vein opening, then you should dye your hand with something from the abscess all over the skin, then insert the needle underneath the area you are holding in your hand, and pierce it, and use a double thread so that you can pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess, as I told you, or one of its two parts to the shoulder with a thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you fear that the thread might slip out, then insert another needle through both threads under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then scrape off the excess pus, then scrape off the excess from the skin and leave what is tied [to the thread].
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a moistened cloth in wine and oil on top, then administer treatments of bandages and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, they come to the nerves when they are hurt, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often in shoulders and elbows, and all joints where there are abscesses, and the color resembles that of the body, and it has various conditions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is tightly restrained, the patient feels pain, and it is not completely in the body, but under the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and must be quiet everywhere, and neither go forward nor backward, nor downward nor upward, and that which is in joints should not be covered by iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	by chance there might be contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are on the head or forehead, use the spatulum.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, they suspend it on the hook, and slit it open, then cut out the stone and close the wound with stitches, and heal it up.
des grosses boces pendans	large bumps hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes this happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called 'fungus' because of its resemblance to an ear, and its root is fine but the head is large;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are both small and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	I also saw one man who had two in his belly that looked more like mushrooms than anything else; there was no difference between them, they were white and had thin roots, and they were split open and moist fluid ran from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them open and found that one weighed 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; the procedure for incising them is to look at whether the illness is moist, and the color of the articulations is white and moist with fine roots:
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if the spatumil is large enough, and have the fire cautery ready in front of you.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For many times there are great bleeding wounds when cutting, and if the blood does not stop, then hurry to use the cautery:
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-prepared piece of lead wire, bind the articulation as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it, and do not cease to squeeze the hair of the finger until it pops out the joint, and piece by piece without effort;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, then have fear of covering it all at once in the same way for the belly, but you can indeed cover half of it, then cauterize it so that it does not return;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cure the wound, and be careful not to cover the tubercle which is of a purple color and poor in sensation and of milky aspect.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is a deep abscess, and I will come to the treatment of sores next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil bursts
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or split ulcer, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as happens in other routings, or of blood coming from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is from the routing of the ulcer and from the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and it opens with diverse exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it recoils, and then returns, and sometimes it becomes serrated, and grows larger at the entrance of the bath and from great exertion.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	If it is due to moisture, it is a minor matter, and it becomes apparent when you press it with your hand, and it does not restrict movement.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is due to blood, it is indicated by large, hard abscesses, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to wind, there will be swelling upon touch, and the actions will indicate whether it is due to arterial or venous blood, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Let the wound heal.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, because of the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to tighten his abdomen and extend it straight, then sign all around the navel;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command him to lie down quickly between your hands, then go around the area you have signed all around the navel, then bring half of the abscess up to the top, all along the great toenail;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tightly wind it with a strong thread or a firm silk cord, and let us tie it firmly.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then cut the abscess open halfway along its length over the ligature, and push your finger inside, and seek out the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it caught on the ligature, then release it and pull the intestine outside the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find a lump, then cut it off at its base and remove the excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein opposes you, go around it smoothly, then return to your task and take two needles, thread them with strong thread, and pierce through what you have done in a cross shape;
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then draw the abscess out in three places over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave it open so that it may drain on its own;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cup it when it is subtle and porous, then the cure of what is appropriate, and drain the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the area as is appropriate, and close up the wound.
dou chancre	from cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have already discussed the types of sores and how to treat them with medicine, as well as how to avoid using iron in the treatment.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and we shall speak of the sore in ulcers, and the great care that must be taken in treating them, and the ancient writers say that when a sore is in a place where it can be scratched, like a sore on breasts, or thighs, or similar places, and it must all be removed when it is in its early stages;
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when they are large and old, you must not touch them, for I cannot heal any of them.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	I have never seen anyone heal from this.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the treatment, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then let him bleed if he has a manifest fullness, then bind up the wound in a good place to perform the operation;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then cut your onions or garlic, and shave the head all over, and remove the bones without leaving anything behind;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow out freely, and squeeze the wound with your hand or something else, and if the blood flow is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wound with another healing until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already said in the section on dropsy the similarities and how the accumulation of fluid is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment which is made with medicine, and that which is treated with iron:
si est eclites soulement;	if they are only dislocated;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch with iron in these two cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to say, tympany and iposarchy, for it is a deadly thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	therefore when you treat this condition of dropsy which is called "dislocation" in medicine, and the treatment does not help, then consider whether the patient is weak, or has another illness than dropsy, such as a fever and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	do not touch with iron, for there is doubt in it;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient is very strong, and has no other illness but dropsy alone, and is not too young or too old, then you must work thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	let the patient lie on his back in your arms, and press his belly down by pushing out the water to the lowest part of the penis, then take the spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And make an incision of 2 parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	to a point, and yet not so sharp that it can penetrate to the intestines when pushed in, nor can it pierce the skin.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look to see if the dropsy is pressing on the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	you should split open under the armpit;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is due to a liver ailment, then your split should be on the left side of the armpit;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it's due to a kidney ailment, then it should be on the right, and the patient should not lie on the split so that the excess fluids do not flow to that weak spot;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce the skin with your instrument, and stab it, and lift your hand to the entire area between the skin and the syringe as if you were skinning in the amount of a fingernail or more;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the syphilis until the pus comes to the surface, and that is the place of the water, then pull it out, and insert this instrument from which there is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a thin silver needle, and it is made of lightweight copper or brass, and has at the bottom a small hole:
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side there are three holes;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other, and one elsewhere;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is shaped like a feather, and that is the shape of the incision that scribes make in feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top there is an eyelet, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it is pulled up through the eyelet;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	therefore empty half or a third of it, because if you empty more than is appropriate in that hour, the patient might die from the loss of vital fluids, or he will faint, or he will approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease signify, and his pulses;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then treat the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the membrane that blocks the aperture above the sciatic nerve, about which I have spoken, piercing it according to this method:
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then resume the instrument the next day if you see that the patient is suffering from it, and treat a small amount of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this for a few days, and be careful not to follow until there is no more water left but a little bit.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt the disease, and leave a lot of water, then treat with hot sand or ash, and much sweating in a bath, and tanning, and drinking;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and treat with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the pus, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a foreskin, or with a small foreskin, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, cut it with a very sharp knife according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then put a subtle plug into the penis, and tie it and keep it like that for 3 or 4 days. And when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and urinate, then put it back in again.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And by chance, this may not be necessary, because the urine that comes out doesn't let it stay closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those with small wounds, if treated with a plaster of honey, as we have said, will broaden.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who don't have the opening in their place are blue, because some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, which prevents them from urinating until they lift their penis upwards.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And they can't ejaculate because the fluid can't reach the glans, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the way to do this is for the patient to lie on his back, then the tip of the penis and glans are cut to the size of a feather, so that the slit goes through the middle, as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and beware of bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, then stanch the bleeding with something that stanches blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times this hernia occurs in the penis, and it has an ugly appearance;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are both malignant and non-malignant types;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	so you should grasp them with tweezers very gently, pull them out and clean the area thoroughly, then place wet cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment over it.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, discolored and putrid, then you must apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and if the wound is on the shaft, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the foreign object that is inside.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is sewn up, the patient can be discharged.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat it together, there is the risk that the head of the shaft is not healed and it becomes perforated, causing blackness and corruption in the shaft and in the scrotum.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	So you must cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply an ointment made of honey and flour from pomegranate rind and poppies, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is a bleeding, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	There are two ways to perform cautery:the first is when the wound is old and the skin around it is hard, which
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is, in the case of bleeding and corruption.And the second is when the wound is new and the skin around it is soft, which is as follows:
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, then you should pierce or insert a cane of reed into the penis, and the patient should urinate through it.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the foreskin is swollen at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, whether due to a wound or an abscess, then you should cut it with a sharp instrument until the swelling is reduced and the head of the penis is relieved of pressure all around.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a serious matter to discuss this, then you should cut it with a spatulum on the head of the penis and the foreskin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then clean gently between them, and place a thin, damp linen cloth in cold water on it so that it does not swell again.
de la circoncision	on circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a matter of dislocation like the other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Yet when we do this work of our own will, and properly with children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest for their salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who made circumcision around the foreskin, and with force, and on every new born baby.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If it is a hernia because there are two membranes, and by chance one is above and the other below remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Now they cover it again, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is from the foreskin is not secure the tip of the member.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And in the purification of the nail by chance escapes the iron, and they ruin the work, and many times are born so that they do not need purification, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the cleaning that is done on the scrotum, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the testicles are cut justly above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, you cut equally in a circle all around.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the son be well tied around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and the method of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only tie the thread around the penis, and then pull it in all the ways you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then hold him upright between your hands, and press down on his genitals with your hands or under your feet so that the child cannot see them, or any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then put your hand over the penis and blow or breathe on it, and pull it upwards so that the head of the penis goes in;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then cleanse it well from the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under the testicles with another thread;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it by the two fingers of the second hand at the scrotum and index finger, and squeeze between the two threads, then lift the head of the penis rapidly and pull the chief of the penis;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the wound.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on top of the powder and then cover with a bandage glued with an egg yolk cooked in rose water, infused with rosemary oil, and left until the next day, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The shape of the forces for purification is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two shoulders should be thin and sharp, and the hands should also be as large as the wrists evenly:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the mistake of purification is when the heart inside bleeds with the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	therefore, you must stretch it with your fingernail so that the flesh makes an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tweezers and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they persist for three days, and what is underneath the skin is swollen, let it be until the abscess is drained and the skin slightly scarred.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	then press on it as much as you can, but avoid the area of the penis, which will not be harmed by this.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Then treat the area of the wound with a poultice, as we described in the treatise on powders. If they press on it too hard, and the swelling goes above, this will not cause any harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat it then as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The obstruction of urine may be due to a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or dead flesh, or similar conditions which we have described in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not flowing freely and you see that it is retained by a stone which is lodged in the throat of the bladder, then the patient should be made to bend his knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and let his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and restrain the patient's pain as much as he can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the bladder is compressed for the extraction of stones from above, which causes the urine to flow out.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform an extraction using a instrument called a "syringe," which has this form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	And it should be made of thin silver wire, like the feather of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The cane should be about a palm and a half long, and thin at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the way to extract the urine is as follows: take a doubled wire and attach a ball of wool or cotton at its end, then insert the end of the wire into the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut away the excess of the wool and plug it up to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or lard and yolk of egg, and have the patient sit on a chair, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the foreskin back over the glans;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the patient urinate until the bladder is empty, and this is not done according to this order unless the conductor where it goes is crooked;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then wind the thread around all the wool little by little, and the urine will follow the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see it oozing out with water and medicine, then do everything using the instrument called "clepsydra", and that is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed and has three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	II on one side and I on the other, as you can see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the small hole through which the medicine is applied should be such that it blocks the penis without addition, and one should be able to draw out moisture and insert when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see your medicines entering the bladder, place the tip of the syringe in the moisture and draw it out through the opening;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	you will draw out the moisture with the syringe, then quickly plug the hole;et si le chief dou keusteur est en la moistor, tu le tiens, et trais au traiant qui est ens.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the tip of the syringe is in the moisture, hold it there and draw out through the opening. If the moisture enters now, the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the shape of the subtle catheter used to catheterize the bladder:
si est ci:	if it is here:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or bronze, and its head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below to the armpit where the lymph nodes are located;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture you see fitting for the blistering of the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts in the form of a loop made from a double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then insert the tip of the blister into the penis, then squeeze your hand over the bladder gently, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a round, holey circle;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then thread a strong cord through these holes and assemble the circle like one assembles a wheel, and put inside what you want of oil, moisture, and water, and tie it in the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you did with the bladder, squeezing it with your hand until the moisture comes out into the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction, along with medicine;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I have described the difference between a stone in the bladder and all the signs, and which type of stone one should operate on;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder and penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the water flows from the bladder like water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and he clearly sees, and feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it blocks up;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and has much of these discharges the fundament;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and healing is swift in children until they are four years old, and it is very slow in the elderly, and it is moderate in those between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient through an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes blocks the search for stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet and lift and move him so that the stone sinks to the bottom of the bladder, sometimes emerging from above.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then have him sit in your lap, his hands under his thighs so that his bladder is completely tilted downward;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then probe and touch it inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the channel, then hurry to cut on the stone.Et s’il ne le sent pas dedens, si doit il demorer assiez ains qu’il ait grant desir; et tu te leves dedens li quier
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not drop when touched, then the patient should remain sitting until he feels a great desire; and you lift up inside him the urethraIf it does not drop from the touch of the whole, then wet your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and press it into its socket, and seek out the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then draw it towards the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press down on your finger, and put the stone back into its socket where you see the incision.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell the patient to extend his testicles upwards in his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then put the spatulum in its proper place, for that is how it is formed:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and cut straight down to the stone, and your fingers should be pressed against the anus, and the incision should be made across so that it is wide at the top, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	perchance the press so the testicles which are at the foundation, that they leap out without work;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is a certain stone in it with angles and margins:
si est griés a issir;	if it is grazed to come out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is one underneath that resembles a grape, and round, whose exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	For those therefore with whom it has angles and margins, make the incision larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump out, then you must hold the testicles steady with tweezers that are just like a file at their tip in order to squeeze out the stone so that it doesn't escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you insert under the instrument an extremely thin, curved hook;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot grab it like this, then enlarge the opening and if the blood is exposed, then squeeze it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, then plug the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then pour water on top, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it needs to be sutured, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	either he dies, or the urine comes again through the opening where the urethra cannot heal;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nevertheless try to draw it out, or tear it with tweezers, until you have drawn it out in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have finished your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and press it, and put over it a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then re-catheterize the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the site well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if hot abscesses come upon the wound and scorchings, and blood clots in the bladder, and the urine is retained by this, which occurs in such a way that without salt with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	therefore you should place your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and burst it;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then open the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help him in every way you know until he is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and you should bind his two thighs together with medicine on the wound every hour that you treat him.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is in the ureter, and lodged there, and the urine cannot pass through;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if this treatment that I say is done several times, it is an excuse for the cutting, because of this treatment.Et si li piere sont grans et ne puent issir, mais sont en leu ou li urine se retint;
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tried this myself.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this shape and let it be spiked at three angles on a poker:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take thread and tie it around the end of the penis, so that it cannot go back into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then pierce the foreskin lightly with an awl, until it reaches the glans;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the awl in your hand in the penis little by little, until you can pierce the glans from another side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	then the urine will flow, and then press your hand on what is left of the stone which is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	It will be broken at once, and will come out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for any reason that impedes it, then tie a thread under the glans and another one above, then make an incision in the penis between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let them grow until they are healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It sometimes happens that stones are lodged in women's wombs, and if it does, the cure is difficult and prohibited for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that the woman may be a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is skilled enough to examine her, especially if she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a skilled woman skilled in this manual art;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth reason is that the woman's stone is often deeper than a man's, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. If necessity demands it, then you should press a skilled midwife, and with difficulty you will find one, and if you do not find one, then seek out a subtle, clever castor.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and present to her a very wise dance in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command of the inquiry into the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then she must push her finger into her vagina and search for the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, she should press it under her finger, and he should command her to push her finger into the wound and squeeze and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then she should move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until it comes to the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then she should press on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the urethra, the place where it is located; then she will feel the stone in that part;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his bowels above or below, and let the incision be small at first;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then pour in wine into the incision if you feel that the stone is as sharp as the wound so that the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones;
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	that is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and which have many variations.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	And if you know their appearances to identify the exit.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the blood flows, put crushed vitriol in its place, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting stones in men to assist you in your task;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the blood flows and it is from the artery that has been cut, put the powder on the spot and hold it in place with bandages and splints, and do not touch it again, and leave the stone and do not pull at it, or the patient might die;
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ramice aquose is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white pus, which is under the skin of the testicles that contains the egg;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg if one believes that it is another egg;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the skin of the testicle between the white pus which we have mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and that does not happen by itself.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this disease is due to weakness that comes from the testicles, and this matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colours:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it is yellow-tinged, or white, or black, or water-white, and there are more variations;et ceste moistor, s’el est de color declinant a jaunice, si vient de malancolie, ou de sang mist en la veine, et ceste moistor ne doit estre curée:
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and the signs to recognize this assembly are that if it is in the white pus which we have mentioned, then it is an abscess, a little longer than an egg, and does not open the testicle, because there is moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in its own webbing, then abscesses are formed with an egg-sized portion, and because of this, one thinks it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white scrotum, then he feels good;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test throughout the entire scrotum, from which the form is as follows.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, which comes after the instrument, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron, then the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then lie on his back, on something slightly elevated, and put under him a lot of blankets;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the scrotum towards one of the two ribs near the heart of the testicles;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatule of lead, and cut into the skin of the testicles from their end to the root, and make your incision straight while separating the skin of the testicles up to the white scrotum, and carefully peel it according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the scrotum with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then insert your fingers, and lift up the scrotum.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the heart of the testicles but only the scrotum;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut into it all around carefully and in sections, especially the edges of it subtly, for if you do not cut well enough to draw blood, then the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the testicle jumped out of place during your work, then put it back into its place when you have finished working on the scrotum.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then sew up the two lips of the cut with one stitch, then treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the suspended vessels to prevent the flow of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the scrotum all the way around the suspendory ligament, extract the testicle, and treat it as we have described.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	If the wound is divided into two parts, know that these are two testicles;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	cut the other part in the same way, then wipe away the blood and put soft lamb's wool soaked in rose oil into the wound;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put on another layer of lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil, and place it over the testicles, and put on doubled linen, and tie it all around according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Take two pieces of cloth and fill them with wool wadding according to this appearance and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and let one piece hang over the buttocks to the back, and the other to the part of the groin.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and let the other two ends hang over the two hips, and let the whole girdle be tied in a knot at the loop of the breeches;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes this ramice is used as a cautery instead of an iron knife, and you must grasp the thin cautery with tongs, and cut through the skin of the testicles, and it will be heated as we have said, so that the white pus contained in the fluid is exposed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	take the cautery according to this shape, and pierce that testicle gently, and scorch it with this thin hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cut in every way you can, until you have cut out everything.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is safer;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and avoid bloodletting and cutting wounds;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything goes against you, such as an abscess, bleeding, or anything else, then treat what goes against you according to what is said above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horrible appearance, then perform a puncture, as I have told you, and when you are certain through the signs we have discussed that the watery fluid is gone, then have the patient sit on a raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess at its lowest point all the way to the bottom of the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the holes be wide so that all the water flows out
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the spot, and tie it, and leave it so that the rest of the water flows out, then treat the wound until it is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white membrane does not let the water out through the mouth of the wound, then you must pierce it with a needle or instrument used to treat water in hydrophobia, as described earlier.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and widen the wound, and know that the water will come out, and will gather again after six months or so, and when it is gathered as before, then the illness will pass its course.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the cutting of this nerve there is fear in many ways, because of which I think it is better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the treatment and the appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I therefore say that many abscesses come about the body, and especially in the groin.
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this happens in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to be understood as resulting from an excess of bitterness and ague, which is spread to the groin, or from a blow;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it causes no pain, and is a serious abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes there are dark, pus-filled abscesses, and others that are blood-red in color, and at times they originate from an artery, or from a vein swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from an artery, it can be detected by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press on it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	He who is made from the swelling of a vein is known by his reaction to the touch of your fingers, and anyone can properly make an incision on this sort of abscess, and on others like it;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and you should cut the skin of the testicles, then the sac will be above, and the thread will come out from under the white membrane, and free the suspensory ligament from all parts of the sac.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the testicle is already swollen with these new growths, then you should cut the sac and tie it off;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is herniated in the membrane, or in what is inside the vessels, then you should free that tendon and tie it off roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the tumor is in the back, then you must cut it out entirely and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, then dress the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedies until it is healed.Et quant tu as curé la plaie, si covient que li patient soit a l’ombrage et au repos, et qu’il s’alimente de boire et manger legier, et qu’il ait peu de dormance, si com il oult.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is a hernia wrapped in a wrapper similar to a cherry, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when he walks;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment of this disease is just as fearful as the one above, and yet we will tell you about it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspenders of the testicles low to your fingers, to all the vessels that are near the penis, and press them firmly, and extend them strongly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut through the skin with a sharp, wide blade across the vessels, so that they are exposed, and then scrape on each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then he inserts a needle where the thread is doubled, and ties it at the first place where the vein appeared, and ties it directly to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then he cuts them in the middle correctly, following the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then he treats the wound as in the others, that is, one testicle may hang down;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for there is no harm from this, and if it becomes visible in all the vessels, then one must milk the testicles through all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the veins do not lose their color due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	from the root of the eye socket
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The cause of this disorder is due to the incision that occurs in the sigmoid colon, or the extension over the abdomen in the area of the veins, causing the intestines to descend from that rupture to one of the testicles;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this rupture is in the sigmoid colon, or due to the extension of it, and these two types come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from percussion, or jumping, or coughing, or lifting a heavy load, and from similar activities;and this happens through the sigmoid colon, or its extension, and these two types come from many causes:
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs that it is due to the extension of the sigmoid colon are that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly;and this happens through the sigmoid colon, or its extension, and these two types come from many causes:
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscess is even all the way to the bottom, because the ulcer pushes on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a dissection of the shoulder, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses are diverse appearances under the skin near the surface, and this is due to the output of the intestine and the body being pushed by the shoulder.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the nerves go with the intestine, and are retained inside, and cause great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron, one must fear, for which one must avoid it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of treatment is to have the patient push his intestine back into his abdomen with his hand through the wound, if he can reach it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then you should hold him by the neck between your hands and lift his hips;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then they are pressed down from above, and all the skin of the scrotum is cut away from the testicles;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert hooks into the wounds of the abdomen according to what is needed to open the wound, so that the intestines can come out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape away the ulcer under the skin of the scrotum until all of the hard, white ulcer is exposed on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, in between the white ulcer under the skin of the scrotum and the second ulcer, and separate what is behind the testicle from the second ulcer;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move your right hand inside the heart of the testicles, and have the white soffac on top in your left hand, and lift the egg to the entire soffac towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to stretch the egg upwards and loosen what is air behind the string;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and feel with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped or hard white soffac, and if you find anything, push it into the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle with a thick thread made of six threads, and insert it into the back part of the soffac, which is after the skin of the testicles;et puis tire fortement l’aguille et le fil dedens, si que li intestin soit tirée derrier le syfac, et est le membre en sa place.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	and then pull the needle and thread inside strongly so that the intestine is pulled behind the soffac, and the limb will be in its place.Afterwards, cut the shoulders which appear from the threads, so that there are four threads left;et puis quier si li chiés ne se remue pas
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then he ties them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and binds it with a strong thread made of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then he wraps the roots of the threads and binds them tightly from two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter, so that no abscess forms;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and ties the thread according to the first long thread in two parts, and after these two threads leaves the syringe which is under the skin of the scrotum with a large amount of one egg;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and then the other according to the roundness that the egg carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut into the part which is under the skin of the scrotum, so that the blood flows, and the bowels, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply wool moistened in oil, and place it on the wounds, and then the thread that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision out of fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, leaving the ligament intact as it tears through.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	And if it doesn't drop quickly, use a hot water compress and apply what we have described until it does.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this section, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients say that it is made like the thread that binds the vessel, after cutting it slightly from above to below;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut it in half, and treat the abscess with this, until the vessels are closed;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes, a rot comes in the gums, as we have said, and the place opens;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and none of the intestines come out as testicles, and if any do, it is rare, and they heal quickly;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and yet if it remains too long in this state, the wound or ulcer will increase in size as the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens because of the extension of the ulcer which is in the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended, then made soft and swollen, and open;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment is by cautery, as we have previously said;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and the patient should lie on his back between your hands, then apply a poultice of the powdered herb according to the size of a bean three times;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	then draw out the ulcer which is under the skin and take some of the juice and place it on the visible ulcer;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it into the depth of the abdomen, then cut the two visible ulcers on the head of the juice, and cut both;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then pull out the head of the bowel, and do not cover it with a bandage or extend it with anything else, as I have made you aware in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it through the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, clean and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The ulcer is constrained and has no appearance in the roux, and cautery is more beneficial in this case and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men, because the parts inside become soft and can be seen through the skin;
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, that the patient lies on his back, and the physician presses the soft skin over the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring together the two lips of the wound with one stitch, and if you see it, sew the excess of the soft skin firmly with three or four stitches;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then bandage between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, then remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that castration is considered a sin in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is only necessary for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	the first is that physicians know how to answer when asked about it, and know how to treat it;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other is that we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and donkeys and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say then that castration is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one that we do by attraction, we have the animal sit in warm water until the testicles become soft and hanging;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then grab them with your hand, until they are dislocated and you no longer feel them.Et si li testiculoz ne sont pas pendans, mets ta main souz le menton et tire vers le haut tant qu’il soit dem
Du chastrement de taille:	On the castration of the testicles:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	you should hold the animal down and squeeze its scrotum with your left hand, then tie off the scrotal suspension strap, and cut into each testicle at the bottom, when you have thoroughly dried them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave a little pouch of fat on top of the delicate vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this method of castration is better than the one done by pulling them off, because in that method some testicle might be left behind and cause the animal to desire sex.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Of Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	There are two types of hermaphrodites in men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one type is where between the testicles there appears a woman's sexual organs, with hair and sometimes the ability to urinate.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women; it has a handle like a rod and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for both men and women is that you cut off all the extra growths and treat them like any other wound.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second way, men whose urine leaks through the skin of their scrotum, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A tentige is a wound that is healed over the natural part, so that it is too ugly to look at;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You should dye the excess of the tentige with your hand or with a knife, and then scrape it gently;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then the cure of one cure with another until it is healed;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and at another wound that occurs at the mouth of the ulcer, and treat it, and perhaps it will heal, and is according to the appearance of a boil, and therefore they called it the 'cow disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must treat it, as we have said regarding the tenting, and heal it until it is cured.
de erratique	of the erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not understood, or the passage is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	It is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that comes upon it;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is caused by a foreign object, or by a suppurating ulcer or wart, and it is formed as a deep wound in the mouth, or on the sides, or underneath, wherever it may be;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and they affect conception and childbirth, and sometimes flowers as well;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the understanding of this is through observing the urine.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stumps are visibly close by, then cut them with your fingers or with a knife.Si li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is due to a wart and it is close to the urethra, then hasten and treat it thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then squeeze the urethra firmly until the wart is dislodged and expelled;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	take wool, moistened in oil, and apply it to the area, and let the woman lie still for seven days, so that it may not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syphilitic sore is hard and thick, then you should cut it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	if the wound is new, suspend them from the ceiling and the beam;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the blood-stanching remedies, such as oak gall, dragon's blood, incense, and an abundance of egg yolk;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then apply a plaster made from crushed lead, so that the wound may not heal;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and for a long time, and let him use a tent of dry flax;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then other treatments until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is fresh flesh in the ulcer, it should be cut in this way, unless it is a deep abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For one must not touch an abscess that is deep in the ulcer.Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood flows without cessation, and when they are old, they become thrombosed;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have already spoken about their likenesses in the section on signs, and I will now speak of those that can be cured.First, take a cautery made of fire, and apply it to the hemorrhoid so that it leaves the hair; let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and throbbin, when they are deeply embedded in the rectum, and do not appear to the touch, are not cured by a cautery with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the rectum, which one can feel, are those that can be cured.Si on appert li thelul et les emorroides par grant dolur, si convient que l’on le cuie par fer; car la piere n’est mie trove a la guaine, ains est trove en la chair, ou il avient grant dolor, et s’eleve li sang.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	You should therefore place the woman in a cool house, then heat the tweezers and the comb at their roots, then powder them with blood-stopping medicines such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then tie her feet to the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if bleeding occurs, then she should sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour and boil it with honey and garlic, and make a poultice out of it for her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, she should breathe in steam on her back and breasts without hurting herself;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take wool, and moisten it in plantain juice or dogwood juice with old wine, and breathe in the steam on her back.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has drained, then apply ointment to the wound until it heals.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles rough wool, so it should be covered as I have said before.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then cure the wound until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses in the rectum
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come about in the body, such as ulcers and pus-filled sores, and herpes, and boils, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and various other ailments which I have detailed in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I shall discuss in this treatise about hot abscesses that occur in the intestines, which are not among those that occur in the bowels:
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you wish to know the treatment for iron, then observe whether the abscess is painful at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and whether it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore, do not be hasty in piercing it, but let it drain as long as the pain is relieved;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then let the patient sit on a chair, and have two small chairs on which he can lean, and support his back and gather his feet towards his leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his buttocks be spread out, and let him put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then suck the wound towards the right side, and administer the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the wound, from which the shape [of the cautery] comes;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you see the instrument being administered, you should insert the rod first to know the depth of the wound, so that what goes into the instrument does not go in more deeply than it should, and so that it does not harm the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, then the depth of the wound should be covered with cloth so that the instrument does not cause pain;et quant tu i vues amenistrer l’estrument de coi ci vient li forme sus la marris, si covient que tu prends li cautere et li mets sur la marris, si qu’il ne se remue, et qu’il soit bien fix;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and he must put the horn of the instrument on top, and hold the instrument steady.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess has opened, and they have made an incision in the soft part of the hand, then it must be covered with a bandage, with a light dressing.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the bowels have been emptied, then you must put in the wound moist bandages soaked in rose oil, or in dry verde oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the bandage over the wound, down to the bottom of the wound, and put another bandage above the wound, and on the little finger, a clean moist bandage soaked in water or mallows that have been cooked;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it again after two days of ointment suitable for this, until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and sometimes raise the wound and the injury with an enema of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and aristology that have been cooked for a long time;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is sunken in the injury, then you should beware of cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary for the midwife to first know the natural signs of childbirth, and the signals that something is wrong when you see the woman push downward, and desire to smell flowers:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	therefore the child rushes to be born;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then you know that this childbirth is natural, and the baby emerges head first, with the placenta following;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, you should gently push on her belly, so that the child is born quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when they descend head first, the placenta comes with them, and the mother's excess fluids are cleansed through a good cleaning;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and those who come differently do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For sometimes they come out feet first, or outside the body through the chest or arms, or they come out upside down, or they are turned around in some other bad way;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	If it is necessary at the dance that she be wise and skilled in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the ways she should be helped.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the baby comes out head first through a natural birth, and the woman gives birth with great effort, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a saddle, or have women hold her.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	And use the natural oil of rose or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then put the baby between her breasts the small spatumile of which there is the shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and split the afterbirth, and scrape its nail until the fluid that is within flows out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press on the woman's belly until the baby descends, and if it does not descend, then one must enema the woman with mucilage of fenugreek with oil of seisment;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then have her breathe and sneeze out some of the powder, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if she now expels the fetus.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands come out, then you must gently push them back in a little at a time;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot go in, then put the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up high;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then raise the chair off the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not lean forwards when standing up;Apres que li sieges esteit debout, si covient qu’ele soit en ses sens, et teigne le membre qui est disloie,
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	After the chair is upright, the woman should be conscious and the dislocated joint should be held in place; if the hands cannot go in and the child is dead, then grasp the hands with a knife at the tip of the fingers as described above, extract the child, and reset the dislocation in the same way.Et s’ele ne vuit pas lasser aller li enfes, si ten le membre en la main dreit et fort, et met le sie
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the child's issue upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When an infant comes onto its feet, it must be pushed upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	Then rock it back and forth gently until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then hold one foot and stretch it out gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If he jumps up to his hips, instruct him to grab hold, and make him sneeze from the stomach;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if he jumps out, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he cannot jump as we have said, then turn him little by little until he is in his natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he is easily cured.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if he does not come out as we have described, take mustard and oil and gum, and crush them all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and apply this ointment to the mother's abdomen and then make her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is soaked underneath, put the myrrh collar on her and let it stay there for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will soon jump out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	for the child to come out over his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this way, she puts her hands on it little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then she lies down on her back, and her feet hang down below, and she lies on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bends her knees little by little, and then she presses her hands on her belly, and takes away the cushions from under her, so that she is exposed below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump out, she takes her feet and moves them about, then she rubs her belly upwards, and then puts in her hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and pushes the child little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instructs the woman to press until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child which comes out width a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	We must find a way to return the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if we cannot return it, then have the woman stand up and walk.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, then have her lie on the bed, and raise her legs straight;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then bring the mustard that I described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, and then try to return the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and hold the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to grab it as it comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the child's exit at its neck, and spread his hands, and turned his face towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	We must have the midwife tug on the hand, then pull it gently bit by bit, and wiggle it lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it's even, put the mustard mixture of arnica and oil as we said before, then instruct her to move it bit by bit;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and tell her to hold onto it.
et la fai esternuer.	and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way with all the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When all the afterbirth has come out in this way, catch the afterbirth with your fingernail so that the fluids are expelled;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child can move its face and neck, catch hold of it so that it does not struggle, and the child will die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then put the child back inside, positioning it correctly; instruct the woman to hold on several times:
adonques si istra legierement.	then pull gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the exit of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	You should know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, and it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	These are strange, and do not live long if they do.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they will multiply, and are separated by the membrane that divides them, which is attached to the womb.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And sometimes they emerge as naturally as a tail, just as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they emerge quickly, the midwife should act as we have described, and be quick and skillful in what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and act in such a way that it benefits the mother.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one, or two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven, or more, up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the wise glorious sage, and the midwife should know all this, because by chance something similar might happen;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	and she should act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you are treating a woman for a dead child or abdominal pain, as I have said in the previous chapter, and there is no progress, and you are forced to use manual manipulation;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If you need to know whether a woman is of sound health, and has no incident that causes her fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary for the woman to be laid on her back, with her hips tilted downward and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And if she is tied to the bed so that she does not move, this will aid in delivering the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with musk, fennel, and flax seed; then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and musk.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then gently insert them into the mother's privates, taking care not to hurt her; and pay attention to make sure that the child is positioned to come out head first.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If it gets stuck in her throat, or under the beard, or in the navel, or near the ribs, or if it's feet are coming out first, push on its bottom and sides.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and he must dye the thread with his right hand, and place the needle between the thumb and forefinger of his left hand, and draw the thread through all his fingers gently, and insert the needle into one of the places we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the needle:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then insert another needle, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they are moved evenly from one side to the other, so that they can exit; and the needles must be gripped tightly so that they do not move, as shown in this drawing:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if any part remains, he should anoint one of his fingers with oil and insert it into that part, and pull the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if nothing remains, he should insert this needle or a higher one, and do this until it all comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap a cloth around it, so that it goes all the way down.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then, you must cup your hand at the base of the palm or wrist, and you must do the same with the other hand and feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of the child is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if it has a sharp pain gathered at the head, then you must push the spathumile* between your fingers, and press the head, and draw out the sharp pain;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you can use the instrument called 'almidach', from which the mold comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus you will do if the child has a large natural head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull out the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and is forced, let it be split, until the moisture that is in the wound comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as small as you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you should pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on their feet, the pull is light, and the movement towards the mouth of the wound is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is bound in the belly or the udder, then you should loosen it with your hand wrapped in a cloth.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And cut the belly or the udder so that the moisture that is inside runs out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	And if any other part is broken, and the head remains, then push the shoulder-bone with your hand into the wound, and pull it out to the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then put in the hook or two, and pull it out.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it, but rather apply moist and fatty substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and let the patient use poultices, and wash with warm, softening waters.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can bring it to lie evenly, then administer what we have said for a living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one cannot, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, administer what we have said for hot abscesses that come in a wound;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if there is an discharge of blood, let it be put in restraining waters, and let the patient undergo other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had died, then another was sewn over it, and the other died too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time she got an abscess in her armpit, which swelled so much that it opened and began to ooze profusely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the wound, and I thought for a long time, but could not heal it.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attracting plaster, and one bone came out, and after a few days, some others.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I examined the wound, and found bones poking out, until the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman wore it for a long time like this, and then suddenly a little bit of bowing from the heat;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I haven't recorded this chapter until now because when the master finds a strange thing, he will know how to apply a remedy.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	how to return the dislocated joint to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here after comes the form of the press, which is used in books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at two turns around the two shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns of the press should be more subtle, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and its mouth, two fingers wide, and the margin of the wood, one palm and a half;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in between the two limbs there should be two adjustment of this same wood, which are secured in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two settings are placed at the mouth of the wound to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	A different form, which is more subtle and lighter, should be made from ivory or boxwood, according to the appearance of tweezers;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and has two settings, as you see, one palm-long, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the wound open with all the instrument, then let the woman lie on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread, then insert the two settings together into the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand on the whole instrument, just as you did with the tweezers, according to the amount that you want to open the mouth of the wound, until the spouse does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	All instruments are tipped and their appearances multiplied.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the surgeon has prepared them, the work is quicker and the patients are better for it in terms of quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair about the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is unavoidable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained in childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold her breath and then cause her to sneeze with an emetic, and squeeze her hands against her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she vomits, all the better.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pot and make an emetic with herbs that open the mouth of the womb, such as hellebore, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put one end of the pipe into the pot and the other into the mouth of the woman, and hold it there until the steam enters the womb;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make him sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then let the secondine dry quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, command the midwife to wet her left hand in oil of sesame or in musk-soaked water, then insert it into the birth canal and push out the afterbirth;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, grab it and slowly pull it out straight so that the mother does not feel pain during extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pulled out;et quant elle l’avra tirée hors de tout, si le veuit mettre sur une toille ne sur un cotte, et la couvrir
si venra et se desaerdra.	and when she has pulled it all out, she should put it on a cloth or shirt and cover it up
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the birth canal of the mother is tight, we have described the cure for sneezing and herbal fomentation;et s’elle deit en son lit et ne peut lever, et le sang lui vait par la ou elle a accouchie, si covient qu’ele soit sur une cotte ou une toille, et li
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not one of those we have described, then beware of following their treatment;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that he who has the mouth of the wound, to tie him to the thigh of the woman, then cauterize with ointment of four drugs;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if she defecates and passes gas, and then goes out;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nonetheless, when she defecates, if a foul odor comes from the stomach and head, and causes the illness to flare up.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Then it is necessary to use suitable fumigations:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	some of the ancients have tried fumeation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to smoke out the woman for the retention of flowers and afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is in the shape of a dog, and one puts the narrow end into the nature, and the wide end above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and the fumeation is on the coals, and one fume until it is worn out, then starts again another.Et si le fumee ne tuit pas l’esguile, puis si doit faire le fumigation de sauge;
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foreskin pierced, but instead have a thin membrane covering it.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, the midwife must pierce this membrane with her finger, and not with an awl or anything else, and be careful not to touch the foreskin.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, she should apply a mixture of wine and oil on it, and then dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that he will be cured, then put a plug of wool in the wound, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	Sometimes this membrane comes from a wound or an abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	in which case you must cover the wound immediately:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	as we have said before regarding the treatment of warts.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that originate beneath the foreskin are nodules, and they grow larger if they come from underneath the foreskin or in between its two parts, and they can be single or multiple.And if there is a fistula, or more than one:
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when this dislocation is old, it opens and often emits moisture, a white pus or thin fluid, and sometimes these are persistent ulcers.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are caused by an ejection or venting of wind when the patient ejects wind, and sometimes a worm comes out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And there are ulcers that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they reach as far as the hip joint, and to the anus.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And so one knows a persistent ulcer in the rectum, and one that does not burst:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and you should thrust your finger into the rectum, and push in a thin needle made of iron or steel into the ulcer when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has a twist in it, then push in a thin wooden rod, or a horse hair, as far as you can feel the rod or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through the orifices as wind or farts or urine, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not pierce;
si te haste dou curer.	if you want to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has reached the bladder or the urethra, then the urine flows out, and medicine cannot stop it.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tent will come up to that spot;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is winding and pain throughout the body, then it will go away on its own without medicine or ointments;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these weeping sores there is no treatment except effort and the vanity of foolish midwives who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In those that are not weeping and are not old, there is hope of healing through fire, as I have experienced, and the patient should lie on his back between your hands;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and raise his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then put on an iron ring, or a plaster if there is tortuosity, as long as you know where the ring comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around the anus, then you should put your index finger in, if without piercing the ring;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and uncover where you feel between your finger and the flesh, then you know it is pierced;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	They still say that some can be healed, but that happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that is done, one burns the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and insert it into the fistula all the way until it comes out from the anus;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	And do this two or three times until you know that these charred meats are burnt, which look like an owl's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the cautery of moist tents until the swelling goes down, and then the cautery of ointment binding and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this is not done, it cannot be healed in any other way;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent goes in and does not reach the bone which is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of pus or of syrup, and you see the fistula above the covering of the flesh;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut off the top of the fistula at its beginning, and then plug it with cotton before putting in the tent, and then cauterize after, until it reaches the tip of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tent will be released, and will fall out;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then clean those swollen areas that look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus runs out, and goes between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery joins two bone things together:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the scorching of these heated instruments, and the clotting of blood and the drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of wet tents with butter or crushed substance, until the liquid flows out and the heated instruments are inserted into the bowels;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of burning-hot iron brands, and they are dry remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes from the depth of the foundation, and is separated from the body, put your finger into it, and explore it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and within it is the thread or the silk or the iron, or it is about to pierce, then do not have fear that leads to doubt and despair, but rather have faith and hope through the administration of one of three remedies:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the quick, or if you can, insert tents and treat it as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep, lest you cut the container that holds the foundation, and cause the contents to spill out through that passageway;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance you will be healed, or you should remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut away from the foundation, either by scraping or with some pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then probe the wound as deeply as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then examine how to restore the wound and stop the fistula from spreading in the affected area away from the foundation:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is more convenient for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes they are like this:ou la fistule est entree en la plaie, et alerge vers le fondement, ou le
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is by the side of the foundation underneath the skin, then take a tent pierced at the tip in this shape:si la fistule est plus legiere chose que li cuirs ne soit pas trove, si boutes la tente en la plaie au costeit de la fistule, et elle alerge vers le fondement;
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts a twisted thread into it, and inserts the tent along the entire thread into the fistula as far as the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pushing from the edge of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread of that opening, just as you would push your finger into the fundament.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull on the end of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and press them tightly against each other, and leave it for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it some time until the threads cut through the flesh between the two, and they separate;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound so that it is closed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not drain, then have it drained in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to cover with a bandage immediately after lancing, and then treat the wound, as we have said, until it has healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spiny spatomyle for making a fistula is sharp at one end and pointed;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other part it is not, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	There are two types of hemorrhoids:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	either they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there can be small or large ones, and they discharge blood constantly, and there can be one or more, and they are located inside the fundament, and at the head of the fundament;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those which are displaced have a little moisture, and still more or some yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them in the anus, is to command the patient to straining to go to the toilet, until the hemorrhoids come out, and they will be seen.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you are in a hurry, and can grab it with tweezers, or your fingernail, then pull it out at the root;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they cannot be held with tweezers due to moisture, then they can be grabbed with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of lamb's wool;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and powder some hot powdered medicine on top of the cut;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, then treat the other hemorrhoids until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot come out, then cleansing the patient with a sharp and harsh enema to wash away what is in the foundations, so that they can come out clearly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	then the patient defecates, and if the thread is loose from the foundations, then the cure is easy;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you should grasp them with your nail or tweezers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed and afraid of incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	You should administer the stitch in this way:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	take a twisted thread, and insert it into a needle, then pull the thread through from the top, and pierce the needle from the other side, and return both ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be loose;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and tighten the thread tightly, then tie a knot in the thread, and remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one for controlling the flow of blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerota over the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let him defecate, and when he has, treat the wound with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the anus or rectum
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of the bowels within the intestines, caused by natural constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	You should also cut off any scabs that form on the wound with a spatula or your fingernail, so that moisture does not get trapped underneath.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat the wound until it is clean and healing as it should be.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	if it cannot heal, then restart the process of scraping off any dead tissue until the wound is clean and healing well, even if this means causing some pain.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound until it is fully healed.
dou fremit	when it trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A furuncle is a small boil-like growth that forms under the skin and can grow quite large;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes the shivering chills him, and he feels it throughout his body, more in his hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a candle made of goose fat, or fat from a wild boar, and hold it to the shivering until the purple circle around the shivering goes away.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then return your hand to the candle and rub it all around the shivering until you've covered the whole area; this will pull out the shivering by its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit to make a candle of bronze or iron according to this shape, let it be thin beneath and drawn out on top.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not pierce it, lest it stick to the candle, and do not press on it too hard.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you wish, you can cauterize the shivering as described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes they make a clyster of silver, or brass, or molten bronze or copper:
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and sometimes these instruments are made small and large, depending on those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are administered for the treatment of children, and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and there is a disconnect in the abdomen, as you can see, and the bowels are pierced inside;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and on one side there is an opening, and on the other there is none;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the abdomen is where one puts the medicine, in a bladder made of animal hide or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and there should be an inch of space between each hole, then insert into these holes a strong thread wound in a spiral, and assemble the abdomen as if it were a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread in front, then climsterize;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the catheter with oil or egg yolk, or similar things, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the minister squeezes his two hands together, until it is completely empty, then removes the enema, and helps the patient to his feet, and if the medicine wants to come out, he holds it in as much as he can.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a night at once, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat him with a syringe for dysentery, and the medicine rushes out quickly, then repeat it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or rectum, then the enema should be as gentle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is how to make the gentle enema that will not hurt the skin:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the section on wound treatment:
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	now we will tell of the cures for hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of stones, and cuts from sword and knife, or lance, club, spear, or similar objects;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	where they are made according to the places of the body, as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the leg, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is a stone or similar object, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you fear quickly of a hot abscess:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	then let him bleed at once from the head itself if it comes from a little blood from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the wounded part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and dry out the patient's fullness from wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	If he does not want to fast, then his diet should be reduced, and he should drink no wine or eat no meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put a poultice on the wound, if hot abscesses form, only moistened cotton in rose oil or wine with styptic properties;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, if it is still bleeding and not moved by air, powder which I will describe shortly;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the wound has been moved by air, then put on some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, such as from a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together with sutures, as I will describe for wounds of the abdomen, of the chest.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone and can be closed and only holds by a small amount, then stitch it;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard food in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods such as eggs and cooked wheat, as well as pulses, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find a skin boil, and it is not on the bone, then cut off the boil completely, and squeeze it out, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, causing blood loss, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut and tie off the artery, and if you open it, then ligate it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light:Car les maladies de la chair sont legierement curables, se on le cueille promptement; mais en
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And it is important to apply this powder that draws out the pus as soon as the wound has healed over.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the way to make the powder is:Prends fin amont de sal armonie, et de vitriol blanc
pren encens une partie;	Take equal parts of harmoneal salt and white vitriol;take one part of incense
sanc de dragon II parties;	blood of a dragon two parts
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	white vitriol three parts, and the powder subtly, and apply to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it is well healed and joined with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then dress it well, and leave it bound, if it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one makes it only with chalk, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but so long as the wound is moved by fire.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has moved the wound, the same way it was, put on some of this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some digestive poultices, or barley flour made with water and honey, until it becomes soft;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.Et se li est aisi granz maux et grant mortur, il doit estre traittes d’aic
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then draw it out with fine pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about fractures of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	wounds to the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is a nerve, there should be nothing done but to leave the wound alone and not put anything restraining on it, because it hurts the nerves and makes them withdraw;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and nothing cold should be put on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but the medicine should be warm, like hot water washed in soft water and mixed with rose oil, and cooked washed also in soft water, and other stones of similar type, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut and ligate the vessels, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep, and she is pregnant and full of fetus, then it should be pierced higher up;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and blood comes out, then open it, and ligature it, and cauterize it if necessary;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the neck, and the conduit is kept, through which the meat goes, then cut the neck over the spine of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he tightens it gently, and leaves it for a few days, then cleans the wound with herbs until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cut it out.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are bone fragments, then remove all those you can, and the ones you cannot reach, leave until the wound pus, and is drained and healed.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder I described earlier.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a stab or cut wound, and the wound is deep, then examine if from the wound, winds blow through the body:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	you know therefore that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder in it at first, nor ligature it because of the blood which will flow out, piercing through, and return to the heart, and heal the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but apply an attractive ointment, and tie it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have an ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for 3, or 4, or more days;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	and if no spasms, nor tremors, nor pain in the limbs come;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see these good signs, then you know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and works, then know that there is a fistula.
si la cure si com on doit.	treat the wound as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is superficial, in front or on the back, then treat it as follows:
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, with stitches;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, with powder, and if it is deep in the bone, and has chipped pieces, then clean the wound, and pull out the foreign objects if they are loose;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not loose, let the wound fester, and it will ease the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds in other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from rupturing of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	There are great, medium and small ruptures of the belly;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the great rupture, sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, pass through;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because the intestines are not sewed in at once but gradually heated.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, they close up more at once, and therefore a wound in the bowels is better than one elsewhere; and so dislocation of the bowels should be reduced to its place before others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And you should know that there are four ways to sew up the belly:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common sutures happen in the belly, and the sutures of other wounds of the body; and two proper sutures are common to other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Nevertheless, they are more appropriate with the belly, and I will describe each one and clarify:
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and some thing of the intestines are outside, and there is little danger of putting it back, this is through one of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen with cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in such a way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	moisten a sponge or soft cloth in tepid water only, or cook it in water with squills and cyperaceae and spicery, and wash the intestines until the swelling is gone;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes they make this restraining wine, and it is helped only by being alone to deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling leaving, moisten the intestines with water or with honey and vinegar in which mallows have been cooked, for through this the entrance is slowed to a little thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, they make a small wound in the instrument with which one cuts hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is moxibustion of the back, which no one should cut into without great need;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and here are the instruments for splitting it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it is split within the curve and does not break, see the shape here:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, then put them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you can, because this is worth it.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on his back with his legs raised higher than his head:
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the lower abdomen, place the head and feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the wound is in one of the two lower parts, place the injured part higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus you should manage those things that I say about large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, take what you are equipped with, then hold between your fingers and thumbs a piece of cloth which covers the entire wound and gathers its lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common method of sewing, and it is that you thread a needle or several, according to the width of the wound, then leave two threads' length from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle with strong thread through it;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the stitch, which is under the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part, and bring the two ends of the stitch together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then pull the double thread around the needle from both sides, then bring the two edges of the wound together smoothly, and then leave two threads' lengths, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need of needles, until the whole wound is closed;et quant la plaie est restraine, tu i mets I boin fil de linteaue ou de cotoen par dessuz les aguilles en la plaie, et li raides entor le corps, et puis tire les II chiés dou fil, et li raides s’ad
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick, because fine needles pierce all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot pierce well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for this reason they should be medium-sized;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin, so that they do not pierce and open the wound before it heals;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not blister the patient when sleeping, and place tents or bandages on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, leaving them until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of sewing with needles is most appropriate for small wounds, because it only requires one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second sewing method is common, and it is where you bring the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the wound together with one needle and a strong medium-sized thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have sewn these four together, then return the needle to the place where you started, in the manner that one sews a dress.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put spacing between each stitch equal to the thickness of a thumb nail;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This sewing saved a man whose stomach had been cut open with a knife; the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines protruded two palms out of the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought him back the intestine, which had been outside for 24 hours; I sewed up the wound and it healed in 15 days.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physicians had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle:
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat him with ointments, for I was in a place where no such things could be found, nor medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and changed the cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Here I will tell you about two proper methods of sewing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle and thread it with the end going into the inside of the wound;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	once it has pierced the skin straight on, take hold of the needle where you threaded it and pull it through to the other side of the wound, piercing from the inside out;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the technique of this sewing is that you sew just as a leatherworker sews hides, and that you take hold of the skin on one side and pull it towards you, and then take hold of the skin on the other side and pull it towards you, until the seam is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of sewing, which Galen describes as proper, is to bring the two sides of the wound together naturally and to apply one side of the skin to the other, in such a way that:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	stick a needle or tip of the mirror close to it, and just pierce that spot, and leave the two sides of the syringe;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle, and have it pierce from outside inwards to inside, through the two sides of the syringe;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce one and then the other from outside inwards to inside, through two other tips of the mirror that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the main way of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen says this word, and some testify to it, that one should sew up the belly with two needles, with thread in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew hide;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the wound is in the middle of the belly, then the sewing is more difficult than in other places on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is when you find the fresh wound full of blood, so that the fire has moved it, then return the intestines and the bowels;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on the powder, and if the fire has moved it, then put on some ointment that is present until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the thread, and sew the sutures, and the bandages;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you do not have medicine, then put on old cotton as soon as it begins to heal, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need any other medicine in most cases when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal limbs, then you should moisten a light woolen cloth in tempered oil, or rose oil, and place it around the edges of the wound, and under the scabs;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if there is pain or pus in the bowels, and it often occurs, then enema with warm red wine, especially if the pus comes up to the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and open it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to cure than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called "young" cannot heal when they are damaged, and this is due to the thinness of their walls, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of their nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the worm jumps out of the wound, then put it back inside with the intestine while it is still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and has become like worms or black, then you should tie off the black area so that bleeding does not occur there, for there are veins and arteries there;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then grasp what is between the fingers, and place the two heads pendant from the part below the wound until it is dislocated to ease the extraction when the circles contract, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rot of boiling water
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are ruptured and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some people; for I saw a man who was pierced through the belly with a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became an abscess, and the excretion and flatulence came out through it;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease to treat him until he was healed and the wound closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw that it had healed, I feared that the patient still had pain in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	but he remained in good health, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it must be bound in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take a large thread, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened its mouth, place it on top of the two lips so that it holds its mouth closed;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then tie off the head of the thread, and this will hold so that it cannot come undone, then place another thread afterward in the same way until the wound is completely bound;
et cout la plaie.	and then cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If these wounds are in the intestines and there is no harm to the patient, then one can ligature the intestines with a fine thread cut from the intestines of an animal, in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the end of this intestinal thread that is very dried out, and then tie to the end of this intestinal thread a thin twisted linen thread, then thread the needle, cut into the intestine, and wind it in the groove;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of sewing bones is not unsuitable, but according to the path of faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal bones, there is no healing without subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and becomes bow-shaped.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the green, hard, and white nodule, where one does not feel pain, and is as smooth as the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it is clear and thin, and sometimes thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes small, and sometimes large enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is not unsuitable due to one of the nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, due to the smallness of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	or for its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh within it, and on the lips, which prevents new flesh from growing;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or because there is too much puss;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or when the wound is rotting and the matter is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or because the medicine is not good for the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the rot is like a pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the digestion is slow in that region and so is the recovery which also swells by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes and their signs and treatments with medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I should let you know about the treatment of fistula which is done by handiwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula can occur in any part of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	For it can occur in large veins, or in arteries and nerves, in the eye socket, intestine, bladder, sides, spine, shoulder, or any joint of hands or feet. ;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if there is swelling that comes to the principal member, and similar swellings.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this way, they are of grievous healing, and there is no other than labor and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have described, and you have confidence in its cure, and you see it known, then take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, then pierce it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is crooked, then look for a slender tent of lead, because lead bends with the crookedness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot pierce it well with tents, then cleanse it by enema through one of the openings, because moisture moves from one opening to another;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then let the patient bleed at your hand, so that you may feel whether there is bone or nerve, and whether it is swollen all over, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you have learned the exact location and whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the places I told you about, then cut according to what I instructed, and remove the rotten flesh and matter inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep in a straight place, you should cut deeply as much as you can, then put moist bandages in medicinal vinegar, and insert them into the fistula up to its head, so that the medicine corrodes the excess matter remaining at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put warming poultices on healthy flesh until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it does not heal by this method, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve causes pain in the principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, then cut it until the corruption is entirely removed, then treat it with warming poultices until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it does not heal, and the wound is closed as before, know that you have not gone to the bottom;
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if it exposes and pierces until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, then know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy except to let nature take its course;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small bone that is rotten and you can pull it out with tongs, then remove it with the appropriate instrument for this purpose, but if there are many bones, then draw them all out, leaving none behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture causes no harm and there is no error or fear, then cut through the flesh and moisture and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then place something over the wound to encourage pus formation, and leave it until the flesh around the bones becomes soft, and then they will come out more easily;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then clean out the corruption only until the blackness is gone, and then close the wound;si n’at maint os ne grans, si met li meisme remede et restoure la plaie.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large portion of it that is corrupted, and it comes to the softness of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then cut away and cover all the way to the corruption, then treat until it is healed over;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you can take example and help from it in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man of about 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and had no reason to drain to open;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the doctors, through their folly, worked so much on it that the abscess burst, and a great deal of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and there were many openings that all bled and secreted moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many bled him for two years, and there was no surgeon in the art of medicine, so I was called to see his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and the pus that flowed through the holes in great abundance.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the youth became red and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I placed a tent over one of the holes and then examined all the openings, finding that they connected with each other throughout the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I therefore hastened and cut one of the holes so that I could see part of the bone, and found it to be rotten and pierced, and the corruption was going right through to the bone inside.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I removed what appeared to be rotten from the bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except for that which I had taken out;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to heal the wound with dried medicines over a long time, but it could not be closed;et s’il eust estoit curat des premiers joures qu’il fuist mal curat, quare li pertuis erent trop grans,
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I began again and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I tried to solder the place;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not, so I cut around a palm of the bone, and drove it out with all its molars, then I restored it with medicine;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it healed and was soldered quickly, and the wound need not be opened again except for the weakness of the disease, which he could not bear, and because of the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often because of the bloodletting he bled a lot, but he was completely healed and in the place of the bone a hard lump formed, and he had a good disposition and did not suffer any harm or ill effects in every way, neither when walking nor when standing.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take a string, and tie it to the head of the bone which is open, and order someone to pull it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and tie another string of linen larger than the first string, and tie it around the flesh which is above the bone, and pull on the head, so that you draw up the rotten flesh from below, and uncover the flesh above the place where you want to solder, so that the soldering does not hurt the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a fire or a table under the bone to cover the rotten flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and one must probe as far as one can see and feel the corruption, and probe again afterwards.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then place fire under it, and probe from one side of the corruption to the other, probing deeply into the corruption as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is at the joint, then uncover the rotten joint and probe the bone on the other side of it;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the middle of two joints, there is no need to uncover it all;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is at the base of the hand or the foot, then that is a serious matter, but nevertheless you must probe to find out how it opens;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to damage the vein or nerve.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the types of knives and needles used for cutting bone are many, depending on the position of the bones, their appearance, their thickness, their thinness, their size, and their strength.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and because of this, you must prepare a tool for each type of work.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you what tool to use, depending on your knowledge of this craft and the nature of the disease.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	then choose the tool that is appropriate for what is needed.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulders may dislocate due to internal or external causes;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated that corrosion with various medicines, but it does not improve, then you must cover that limb up to the place where the corrosion is, so that the patient escapes death or, if it is greater, the evil of the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire, and then the blackness appears, after which the corrosion spreads from one limb to another and throughout the body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	and if it is caused by poison from certain venomous creatures such as sea scorpions and vipers and the like, if the corrosion is on the head of the arm, then cut it off, and do not give any time for the venom to spread to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches the hand, then cut at the joint so that the corrosion does not spread to the arm.Et s’il vient jusc’a bras, si la coupe a la coude, et ne li doner mie espais de venir adé;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it reaches the arm, cut at the elbow so that the corrosion does not spread further.And if it reaches the elbow, cut at the joint of the wrist
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the wrist, that is death, and there is no remedy but to cut off the affected limb.Et s’il est al chief du bras ou al coudé, si le coupe a la jointe sus la piere, et s’il li viegne par maint ou par auter member, si le cope a l’
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do likewise when frostbite occurs on the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it occurs in the first joint, then the toe after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it occurs on the foot, then all of the foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it ascends the leg, then at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it occurs above the knee, there is no remedy except to cut off the limb and the patient will die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the method of covering the affected limb is to tie it above and below, and extend one minister below the binding, and another minister above the binding, and you untie the flesh between the two bindings with a one-span wide incision, so that the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cover it with silk, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, and cause other injury and abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, then cauterize the area strongly, or apply some restraining powders to it.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the wounded member with suitable bandages and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to a man one night:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He had a darkness that looked like a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his toe of the foot, so much so that it discolored all the way to the foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the man saw the corrosion, he started to cover the foot, and it was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	A long time after, the corrosion returned to his finger on the hand, and he came to me, and I applied some powdery substances after cleansing the body, but could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wanted me to examine his hand, but I didn't want to because I had no hope of understanding the nature of the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I doubted that if I cut his hand, he would die, for man's strength was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and they all despaired, and returned to their land, and had their hand bandaged, and were healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not written this tale for anything but that one might learn from it if they need to.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes great swelling;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they rupture and discharge, and the flesh remains hollow, just like vessels;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin above is as delicate as a split piece of cloth, and it does not heal up to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called 'sain', and is not called 'fistula';
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it reaches the bone deep inside, then it is called a "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and if it is so superficial that you can cover the whole wound with a single bandage, especially when it is thin, just like a napkin;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not worry about its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you suspect that the skin will die, and the decay is not deep, and the flesh around it is thick, then treat the wound with a blister:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	examine if the abscess is large and the pus in it has an offensive smell; then blister with Egyptian medicine which is made like this:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take honey, oil and litharge, in equal amounts, and mix the medicine in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take this according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and inject the breast, and constrict the orifice;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine remain in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this as many times as necessary until the breast is deflated and the pus removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and sometimes they are injected with water of ashes when the other medicine is not available; take vinegar ashes from a grapevine, pour water over it, then strain and inject into the breast until you know that the breast is fully drained;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then inject a mixture of water and honey with a little quicklime powdered in it;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you can inject a mixture of honey and melted wax, so that the honey has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wax makes the breast perspire;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleaned, then cleanse it with something that makes flesh grow in it, and you take a poultice of diafinit, and mix it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you cleanse it with some medicine and ointments, of which I have spoken about the properties in the section on ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the wound is small and the tip of the clewing tube cannot enter it, then widen it with a knife a little, and put in it a tent made of egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened enough;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave only enough space for the clewing tube to enter, and if the opening that weeps is above, then cover it with a cup or something else that is lower down.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is drawn fully, one should not let the arrow fly;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cover the target below as you wish, then adjust so that the bow points to the lowest place it can reach, for when the bow is drawn fully, one should not let the arrow fly; and if you cannot cover the target below as you wish, then adjust in such a way:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	let the bow point slightly downward, and leave nothing of the bow;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidation medicines to place over the wound, and they are on top of the linen cloth that covers the entire wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover the hole of the wound as tightly as possible with the largest opening first, then apply ointment on the other cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound to loosen the bow, and do not remove the large cloth for several days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and that which is above the opening of the breast, often remove in order to take out the bowels, and know what flows from the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in such a way and you see the nature that emerges above the opening of the breast, then you know that the milk flows out, and the breasts are empty;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you loosen the wound, change the other dressing, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast milk flows low and indigestible after many days, know that the breast does not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons creep slowly, you must not despair of health, for health draws near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people whose wounds heal slowly, and others who heal quickly;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if undigested bowels emerge from the breast after many days, know that the breasts will not empty;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breast is slow to dry and is swollen, then apply medicines that are moist in substance but dry in effect, like an ointment of diafragma, for it contains a large portion of vitriol, and it is the most effective medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take diafragma ointment, and make it with rose oil, and equal amounts of old wine;
puis le confit et en use;	then cook it and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and with the same make honey candy, when diafragma ointment is not available, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them and sprinkle on the honey while it is over the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	then apply it to a cloth, and place it over the breast, and sometimes also administer aristologus, a long root, and roots of celestial lily, which is like barley grain and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and use simple remedies or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Grind them up into a powder and mix with the honey I mentioned earlier, then use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the wound is deep and not healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption goes deep, causing impressions in the bones, or hardening of the limbs or organs.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the wound is a fistula, as we have already said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that forms underneath the nail of the finger or toe, or occasionally in other places. It may form on the hand, foot, or elsewhere.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it becomes infected and is left untreated, an abscess will form, and it will spread and discharge pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes it will spread all the way across.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	This will lead to corrosion of the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the finger or toe will become swollen and red in color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment is ineffective, then you must cut away all the excess tissue that remains beneath the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cauteries are of great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses into the flesh and starts to grow in, you should place a thread under the nail so that it pulls the nail away from the flesh, and then lift it up, and gently cut away at the flesh underneath, and put medicine on the remaining flesh to burn and corrode it all away.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it away and draw out the pus, for as long as the bone is corrupted it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see the toe become corrupted, cut it in half as previously described, and then treat it until it heals.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	If it is swollen and filled with pus and causing great pain, then it must be treated first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the nail of the big toe with a chisel, cutting diagonally across it, and be careful that the chisel does not go all the way to the bone underneath the nail, for otherwise the patient will feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, place something on it to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of a deafness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two toenails that sometimes grow on people's hands by chance are sometimes all flesh, and sometimes they have bones, and sometimes they have nails, and some grow from the root of the joint, or from one of the toes.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Nails that grow out of the top of the toe do not move, but those that grow from the joint of the toe sometimes move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The incision for one who is fat should be made in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a broad chisel.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	That which grows from the root of the joint is difficult to treat:
si te tien dou coper.	if you try to cut it.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one who is born with an extra tooth in the gum at the back, you should first cut away the round flesh to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable silk thread, then heal it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together come by birth, or by joint wound, or by burn from fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	You should cut this growth so that the toes grow back together according to their natural shape;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between them two moistened tents or pieces of cloth in rose oil, so that they do not grow together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two pieces of fine wood, so that the join is smooth, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If sealing occurs on one of his hands with the palm, then treat that wound as it should be treated.
des vils	of the villainous
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large enveloping tubes filled with melancholy excesses which come from various parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him a cleansing enema, and then the basilicon ointment.Et li amonestre et la maniere dou saine et dou cautere, et que il doit faire, si te veult dire.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	There are two types of iron cautery:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is where they cut the skin and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is to lift up the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision is made in this way:Tu prends un fer chaud, et le mets sus li bouton ou sus la
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	You take a hot iron and place it on the button or on the top of the leg where the pain is worst, until the large veins are made small, then you draw the leg out of the joint from above the thigh down to the part below the knee;Tu laves li bouton et la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, si traies le sans noir qui est en li bouton avec un fer chaud de ceste maniere:
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then open the vein in place I, or II, or III, with an incision of a large size, then draw and squeeze out the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient can endure;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bandage it, and instruct him to bind himself with black woolen cloth;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and help the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The remedies for it are as follows:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	examine the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs on it, then put it in the bath, and pour hot water on the leg until it turns red and opens the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, then heat it with fire, and then open the vein from the top of the knee to the bottom of the ankle, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the knuckle, and scrape the vein from both sides until it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white string;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then tie off the vein underneath, until it is raised from the skin, and then one can feel it at the knuckle lightly, then cut it in another place above in three places;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with the blade, just as you have done, and feel at another knuckle, just as you did before;puis la lieve au rait sus la voinne, et la coupe a III dois, si com tu as fait premiers.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then lift it with the blade on top of the vein, and cut it in three places, just as you did before. Then make another incision, or several if you need to, then lift it and cut it at the toe joint, then pull and lift until the second incision;puis la lieve jusques a la premiere taille, et ainsi adons qu’ele soit alevee de tout le cuir, et que ele soit teneue de
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then I extracted it bit by bit, until it was all out, then the scabbard;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull and lift it, then thread a strong double needle, tie it and pull it, and insert the needle under the nail, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it doesn't split, because if it does, you won't be able to pull and lift it, and the patient will be harmed;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have pulled it all out, then place on the wound wool moistened with wine and rose oil;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the nail is bent and twisted and wrapped around the finger, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly but not split it;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat them as we have already said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the knife used to cut the vein is curved, and it does not cut, so that it can pierce the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is very curved, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in dry areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in land without moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and sometimes it grows elsewhere, and this happens from the humors that come under the skin, as do snakes and worms, between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the place changes, and the wound begins to come out forcefully, just as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the shoulder is dislocated, you must wrap it in a piece of cloth four and a half to five and a half feet long, and tie a knot, leaving the cloth hanging down the leg; and every time it slips out of place, wrap it around the cloth again, and tie a knot.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder around, and do not cover it at all at its root, until it is completely healed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cover it, it will enter the flesh and cause an abscess and pus in that place, and great illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this reason, it must be treated a little at a time until the very end, and nothing should remain in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and sometimes this vein is as long as two or three palms, and once a man came to me whose vein was as long as ten palms; and when you cover it, it causes pain in the hole, and penetrates to the very bottom, so that everything comes out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and the matter within is evacuated, and healing medicines are applied to the area for a few days; then it is treated like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes this vein opens up in the joint of the foot or the leg, and it bleeds profusely and causes swelling;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	treat it therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	from worms that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often affects oxen. It is a small worm that lives between the skin and the flesh, moving throughout the body, ascending and descending, until it breaks out of the skin where it goes, causing bleeding;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is caused by an excess of humor, like worms and serpents and roundworms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one fears its malice, for when it moves through the body and ascends to the head, it can enter the eye and destroy it;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see him being cured and milked, he cannot resist it, but when he sees it, he will resist.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	So you should tie the area above and below with a strong string tightly, then squeeze it from above and milk it firmly. If the venom has spread deeply into the flesh, and you cannot draw it out, then cauterize it with fire until it comes out.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And one of the greatest dangers he poses is that he will run to your eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see him coming near the eye, grab under his chin firmly, then squeeze and milk him firmly.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And one should use the wound medicine for cleansing the body of putrid and corrupt humors, and the meat in the intestines must be dried out.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from the pain that comes from wind
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called 'vacirir' in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of her arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and soon after, I saw it rise up to her shoulder as quickly as a worm, as fast as quicksilver when it moves from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain left that spot and moved to her shoulder, and then a little later ran through her whole body until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it was circling around her body as I watched.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease progress in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I have seen many who wanted the pain to move from one place to another, but I have not seen it happen as I did in this woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that perhaps it was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, and thus the wind was forced out;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and they do not appear according to this rationale for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then release it above and below quickly, and then press on until the windiness forced out of its place.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the spot;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it yourself, then treat it with the remover of windiness, such as foul-smelling pills, and pills made from saranapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the part of the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of their points is that some have large ones, and small, and forked, and hollow;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and some have two angles, and others have tongues, and some have pieces in them;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and those that break a bone do so in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in a principal member such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it therefore occurs in any of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you about later become apparent:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	then you must be cautious about extracting this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many cases;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and if these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply lodged, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	The signs of the brain are when the arrow pierces and breaks through the bone, and the dura mater which is above the brain is punctured, and there is bleeding and swelling of the brain itself, and redness and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms and disturbance of the mind, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and sometimes they issue from the nostrils, or the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and sometimes they lose their speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and from the wound issues white moisture resembling pus, and also as black blood;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if these signs appear to you, then withhold treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of a wound when it falls on the heart are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not soft;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and sometimes the wound also becomes mute like the pulse, and black blood flows from it, and there is chilliness and cold sweat, and syncope:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	therefore you should know without doubt that death will follow.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow wound that affects the lung is spitting foam from the wound, and a swollen throat, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow falls into the fold of the foot, it is near the small bones;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and breathes greatly with difficulty and with great pain and sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and all his limbs move from his shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, by chance some undigested food may come out through the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow pierces the intestines in the abdomen, and no feces escape through the rear end, then there is no hope for a cure or for removing the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow pierces into the bladder, and urine flows out in spurts and it escapes, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	you should know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, hip, thigh, and leg, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow pierced his armpit at the root of his elbow:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I probed it, and withdrew it from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without feeling anything.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I extracted from a man's eye an arrow that had pierced under the papilla under the fat of the eyelid, and the arrow was bent, and it could only be touched at its tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was as long as a Turkish bowstring, all in one piece without any notches;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	the child was healthy, and no ill accidents came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And they pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrowhead was made of Arab metal, and it was in his ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I cut off the barbs, and I pulled it out gently until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And they pulled an arrow from inside a man's home that had lodged in his belly, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after thirty days, he showed no improvement;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow and inserted an instrument to pull it out, and it came out without causing any ill effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man with an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound is closed over it;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remains inside him, and he shows no change in his natural functions, nor any harm in any of his natural processes.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man, to whom an arrow had hit his face, and the wound was sewn up.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and stayed thus without suffering great pain.
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many others similar.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And I saw an arrow hit the king's nephew in the eye, and he was slightly inclined to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was all the way in.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat her after she had been hit for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I examined her with all my skills and found nothing;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and she felt numbness and pain under her right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow I placed a soothing and digestive ointment on the spot to reduce swelling;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the place where the arrow had hit.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the ointment many times, and the wound healed directly, and the patient suffered for a long time until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose;
et il le me dist.	and he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied medicine with a corrosive agent to the wound many times until it was open, and I probed it and felt the head of the arrow which had pierced through;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that medicine until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it healed well in about 4 months, and then I lanced the wound that I had probed with tweezers, and squeezed it from both sides, but it would not come out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	so I did not cease to use subtle methods and tools, until one day I took the arrow with well-made tweezers according to what its shape would allow, as described in this chapter, pulling and squeezing the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up and the patient completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you about the extraction of certain arrows so that you can apply my instructions to similar cases, for books cannot encompass everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But the wise masters compare based on a few great things and on what is present and lacking; they find new treatments and new instruments in the descent of strange things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows enter the body where they are pierced in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either through the place where they entered or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which enters through where it pierces is called an arrow entering the flesh, and sometimes it has exited now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not heal now, leave it until the wound becomes putrid around the edges and the discharge has stopped.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is embedded in the bone, and cannot drain, then leave it like that for a few days, stirring it each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it will drain. And if it does not, pierce around the edge with a very thin instrument until the edges are widened, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and penetrates to one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the aforesaid symptoms manifest in the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	do not extract it, but leave it until it has drained for a few days, for if the arrow has reached the brain, it is fatal.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not go to the brain, and the patient remains for several days without any bad symptoms, then prepare an instrument for extraction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is lodged very deeply and cannot drain outward, then administer cauterizations around the wound as I have instructed;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the area until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged in the body where it cannot be seen, then one wants to know its location throughout the entire body;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then draw it out with an appropriate instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then cut it out as much as the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that are holding it in place, then cut away the flesh where it is lodged on both sides as much as you can, and then bend or twist the barbs of the arrow until you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be careful not to break the arrow as you pull it out more forcefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot on one try, then leave it until the wound around it is swollen; then pull it out, for extraction is eased.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the bleeding makes it contrary, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of cutting into the nerve and the vein, and put in a clean way as you can move the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and put the patient in the same position as when the arrow struck him, for that is his greatest aid; and if you cannot, then put him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	Arrows that come from another direction, or something appears from him, or his skin is swollen in that place where one sees or feels it apparently:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Cut therefore above, as far as the tweezers can reach, and then pull it out;
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it will not come out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is stuck in the bone, rotate your hand rapidly, forcing it into the bone and widening the opening; then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be pulled out, then leave it for now, and then try pulling again until it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is a shaft of an arrow inside him, then it goes all the way through.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if there is a broken shaft, and you wish to administer an extraction tool, then the tip of the arrow must enter into the groove of the tool.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then pull outward, and if the arrow is hooked, then pull the tool inward with its tip entering in, to aid the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow has touched [the wound], then you must cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can; then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is broken in the shoulder or leg or belly or bladder or groin, and it is close to the surface, and you can reach it by pressing, then press it out.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And be careful not to press on a vein or nerve, and then pull it out, and then examine the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to an owl's beak; see the diagram.
Et en sont mout de manieres:	There are many ways to do this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the broad-headed arrowhead is also like the feather of a bird, to catch on the tip of the arrow, just as its shape is:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of tongs for pushing and probing is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common body veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are 31 veins from which one can bleed, and they have 16 branches in total, as follows:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two veins that are behind the ears, called "the two little cows";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries in the two temples;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the eyelids, which are called "aspirers";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the top of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two windpipes which are in the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the upper lip, and they are the veins called "augerich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the chest, and common people call it the "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called the "fast" vein, and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and common people call it the  "vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic vein is located on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is situated above the bladder, and it is that vein which is clearly visible above the scrotum.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the basilic vein is located between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches:
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and the foot there are three veins;
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the curve of the scrotum on the left side, and the second superficial vein is at the ankle on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the third vein, called "nesse," is at the other ankle.And there are two more veins in the arm: one is above the elbow joint and is called "vein of the elbow" (veine dou coude), and the other is below
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below those mentioned.And in the neck are two veins, one on each side, called  "veins of
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bleeding of veins which are behind the ears is helped by old cataracts, and by emigration.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the bleeding, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then squeeze the patient's neck with your hand, until the two veins appear behind the ears, coming out of the head in two places.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	take them therefore to your fingers, and where you feel the pulse under your fingers, stop it there;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lance and thrust it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein, and cut through both skin and vein thoroughly with two strokes of the lance, and let blood out until you see enough.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then squeeze it and bind it, until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of incisions and cauteries in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The bleeding of the two arteries in the temples is good for long-standing migraines, and eye sores, and regular tears, and pain in the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the bleeding are as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and the patient should stretch his neck so that the two veins are clearly visible;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel for the pulse under your finger, and then press inwards;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then gently press the vein near the top with your thumb, and insert the lance underneath, and release the vein above, and stop the bleeding according to your need; then clean the wound as before and do the same for the other vein.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then forms a scurf, and leaves it until it is healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken of their appearance and extraction in the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding from the frontal vein is just as dangerous as the bleeding from the cephalic vein in old facial diseases, and causes emigration and redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "borer", of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, press firmly with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then loosen the patient's neck, and ligature the vein until it is healed; sometimes the work is done with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, the flames must not be too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the vein is crooked, for the bone is close by, and the flame may break when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The veins of the two arms help each other, and so do those in the legs, and those in the face, and so do the diseases of the eye and the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the nature of their veins is such that the patient turns his neck in twisting some ligament, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then open the vein, and if the vein is deep, make the flame somewhat long and broad, for there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flame is thin, it may break by accident;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then let the blood flow, as much as you need, and then ligature the vein, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The bleeding of the vein in the nose is good for the headache, and for a sudden seizure, and for illnesses of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and also when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient squeezes his neck, then pinches his nose with his left hand, and takes a long, thin flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligate it for a night, for it is soon restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The bleeding of the two veins helps with strangury, and with the beginning of mensuration, and with many illnesses, and with impetigo, and with corrosives, and with herpes, and with stomach-aches;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the healing is such that the patient stretches his neck back and forth, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and the master standing above the patient's head, and the patient seated, then open the vein of the long arm widely, then draw out blood temperately, as much as is needed.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then do the same in the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and gently constrict the veins so that the patient does not choke.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave it until the morning, for the wound to heal.
de la sainie des leivres	of bleeding gums
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	Here is the translation: The bleeding of the veins in the lips above helps with sores in the mouth, and gum corruption, and splits in the lips, and the pain of teeth and gums.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the healing is such that you have the patient sit in front of you and stretch his neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the lip and examine the two veins, one on the right and the other on the left. You can identify them because they are black and because there are tiny black veins around them:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	therefore take one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then take the thickest of each side, and likewise do to the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of bleeding under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the liver, and for diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the qualities of the bleeder are such that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and he sticks out his tongue, and looks under each armpit for a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	therefore bleed one and the other, and do not go too deep, for under them are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the neck from which one commonly bleeds are bled according to two manners:car il y a l’une qui est desus la veine qui va sus la gorge, et l’auter qui est desouz
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or with a pointed flame of a large myrtle twig, or an olive tree sprig as thin as you can get it, and it is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the candle flame is very important, and it should be as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the flat, veiny veins that hold large amounts of visible blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the shape of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and suitable for bleeding the subtle veins where there is thin, yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The basil vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses under the throat, and in the neck, chest, and abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and the surgeon should bleed it, and then compress the artery underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he pierces the artery, and bleeding occurs, he must then stanch it as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame should not be piercing, but cutting like an "anesil".
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basil does not open clearly, then you must extract it and replace it with another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you can tie some thread to it, or you can ligate the vein in the arm in its place:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and apply the cup to the flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to find the place for bleeding, then you must stretch out the arm and touch the spot until you feel the pulse;et la sainie se fait en ce leu qui le poulz est le plus fort; et la sainie se doit faire sus le piez de costé li bras;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then sign the place for bleeding, and then tie the arm, and apply the cup to the flame with the heat lessened;et si tu voulues saine a l'autre piez de li bras, si covient que tu liasse le piez en bas, et la vo
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	And if you want to bleed at the other side of the arm, then you must let the foot hang down, and keep your hand steady so that you do not pierce an artery when you see the spot swollen, for it is an artery;
eschui la donques.	Avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it emerging upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is blood from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Therefore hurry, and place your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger if the flow stops, which often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Bind the arm and leave it thus, and do not move it:
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be careful not to move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the flow does not stop and the medicine is not present, then cut open the artery, for its source is within.
et estainche li sans.	Stop the bleeding.Et si tu vois sortir li sang a l’envers, si
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And if you see the blood flowing backwards, then take an oak twig, split it, and take one half and bind it on tightly until the next day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if it closes the wound, that is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, then treat it with the powders that stop bleeding, as we have said;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the wound is not cauterized in many ways due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The bleeding from the vein in the middle, if it draws blood from above and below, because it is made up of basil and skullcap, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and the surgeon must be careful not to go too deep and to find the nerve underneath, and if it pricks too much and the nerve is inflamed and the wound is cauterized, and perhaps cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve often opens up, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must treat it with the instrument called 'anesil';et li sainie de la voinne de la man si fait que li santez ne soit pas griés en aucun maniere, et ne trieve li nerf por quoy il soit enfle, car en ceste maniere est granz paors.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid the nerve with your touch.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they cut it deeply.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The headache if it helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to bleed them with an olive-oil flame or a myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries underneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, one should seek the lightest place, and not harm anything if one needs to do it a second time;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance, it swells in some people, where one needs to do it the first time, but it does not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bleeding is according to your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that bleeding is not done simply to maintain health and prevent diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and the bleeding is done in one of the three veins that are in the arm:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	Here is to know, cephalic, fast, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed in the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion are apparent;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should bleed the first day or the third, after two hours or three of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding administered for diseases does not have a set time, but when the need arises, day or night, at all times and in all seasons;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying a child before the fourth month until the seventh month.Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n'a point d'oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the very old who have passed 60 years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when one wishes to bleed, in whatever manner, one should first cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema if one has retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw in harmful excess fluids from the intestines, which harm the principal members.Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	one does not heal at all those who are too full of meat, nor the drunk, however long they may be, nor the dropsical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if one wishes to heal after colic, vomiting, and diarrhea, and excessive sexual intercourse, and exertion, from waking and fasting, and all that weakens the body, whether through injury or illness.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then gently draw out the humors, if the body is swollen, through meat and drink and medicine, if you have the skill.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter the bath, if nothing else harms them, to draw out the blood, and heal the wound around the navel, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and avoid that day exertion, pain, and lust, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be relaxed and cheerful, and let the healer sit higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the ligature above the wound, for if it is too loose or too tight, it cannot heal the wound.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the area with the hands, until the veins swell, and you feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the wound with a little old oil, then place his left hand’s index finger on that vein below the area he wants to bleed, so that the blood flows and doesn’t stop at the cut.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flow like strings when bled, and some are filled with windiness, so that when one applies the flame, it retreats, and the wound cannot be opened, and thus it is with some.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, so the bleeder must be skilled in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good;et s’il ne peut ovrir au premier coup de flaime, si covient que il fuige les voinne
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then restart a little lower down that area or above the hospital, if the area isn't swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the area is swollen and the patient is in fear, let him for a day or two, and don't bind his arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	perhaps hot abscesses will arise;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	don't enter the bath, then restart the bleeding if she wishes;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the vein is small, cut it short and carefully, and you doubt that not as much blood will flow as you wish, then pierce in that vein directly;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work a little on the hospital, until the area is swollen;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the area swollen, then don't restart the bleeding, and put on a little lamb's wool, for it lightens the body of blood, and is medicine in this place where the oil is.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and likewise apply oil to each wound that you treat veins to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and with this one does cauterize and brand, when it is placed on the area;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	so skillfully he splits and separates them when they are too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, especially when it is not treated before the opening of the vein is small, you should act quickly and place a sponge moistened in warm water on the area, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you should do this after the flow of blood from the vein has stopped, and if it remains in place for several days, it will do no harm;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see any swelling, apply a poultice of aloe or myrrh made into a paste with rosewater, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the exit of the basilic vein:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	so put your hand above it, and if you find the area soft to the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	So avoid putting anything on it of what we have said, for it may go into the artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its blood flow and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it out until it runs red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it thick, let it out until it becomes thin;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.And so the blood must be let out of the basilic vein, in order to heal an abscess or wound
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is fitting for one who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, that they make him a larger wound, and let the flames be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for the weak, do the opposite, and one should bleed them a little often, and they must be bled by cutting across, not piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this bleeding method is safe from bloodletting and nerve damage, and it is better than the long or wide incisions.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for the one whose body needs bleeding, give moist bread in pomegranate juice;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is hot-tempered, eat some pomegranate juice three or four times before bleeding. And if of a cold temperament, eat moist bread in rosewater syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after losing a lot of blood, then he should drink a broth made from meat, and a subtle scented syrup, and use the other things we mentioned in the section on syncope, for the opening of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, he should do so little by little according to the amount of his continuing strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And those who want to open their arms after the first bleeding, and they have a strong body, should bleed .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, they should bleed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For he has a lot of blood inside his body that is hot, which brings on fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if one must draw a great quantity, and widen the opening as much as possible.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you examine all the conditions of healing, and put your hand over the patient's pulse when he is healing, so that death does not come to the site of the wound, and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And one must not, when you see to release the arm and make blood come out a second time, and the opening is closed, press hard upon it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is crooked that he extends the arm suddenly, for this would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let him keep still until it heals a second time.
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Or you put the cautery to the tip of the flame, until the blood which is congealed at the opening of the vein flows out, and put on it a little salt dissolved in water, and press gently upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not bind it, until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, let it be in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arms are healthy in the area of the vein in the head because it is composite.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of healing is for the patient to place his hand in hot water until the wound turns red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then let it be left to heal slowly, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now from the inside, not from the wide or long end.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the hole be wide, and let it be healed near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot issue from it, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is swollen, do not put the hand back in hot water, because it is put in more during winter than when swollen.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, that there is no artery or nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of the right hand's little finger is useful for all diseases of the liver, and here is how:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Hold the hand steady, and pour in hot water until the vein swells, as one can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the vein is healthy but crossing it, and you press on it from all sides, it will not hurt at all;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not go too deep because the nerves are completely stripped of flesh underneath; then put the hand back in hot water if the blood has congealed in the wound and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have finished treating the blood as necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to seal it temporarily, and do the same for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the soporific plant is good for all diseases beneath the body, such as diseases of the brain, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of this treatment is that the patient should put his foot in hot water and rub the vein until it breaks, and then press on the joint of the foot;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and if the vein is at the ankle, and going up the foot there are many veins;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	then treat the largest vein, either at the ankle or on the foot, whichever is easier to access.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you heal it on the foot, then guard against the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as well as up and down.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	Let the flames be anesthetized.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot flow out, then immerse the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the healing doesn't work the first time, then try again a second time from above a little bit, because the place is salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and similarly do the same for the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its pulsation relates to the pain in the hip when there is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the nature of its healing is that the patient enters into the bath, and twists above the ankle three times in twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and by crossing over;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is better that you cup her, for the place is safe, and she is very susceptible to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not believe me, heal a vein on his back or front towards the small intestine, and be careful of the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and let blood flow until you see it, then loosen the ligature and put cotton on it and compress it.
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	from cupping marks
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cupping glasses are made from horns, or brass, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and cupping is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping without cutting is done in two ways:l’une est par le feu et l’autra par la main.
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	one is with fire and the other without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and cupping which is done by cutting and drawing blood is done in 14 places on the body, of which one is on the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two more on either side of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and a cupping glass under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and a cupping glass on both shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and a cupping glass above the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the cupping glasses in between the two arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the cupping glasses on both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the cupping glasses at the ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and bloodletting does not treat blood, unless it is from small veins that are scattered throughout the body, and because of this it does not weaken at all, as is done with bloodletting;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered, nor with all heat or without heat, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if, due to necessity or habit, one must bloodlet, then we should do so every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in between and at all times;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they need to belch, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and some who experience bloating and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and some who spit up a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and bleed;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are those who dream, and see through blood and pain and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if it is during the month, we command them to fast after the third hour of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The bleeding from the nose helps with headaches ... that comes to the eyes, and should not happen after evacuating the whole body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this venting is in the place of bleeding from the head, and should not be used by those who are of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, for it does them great harm;et si i a de telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those with serious illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal themselves frequently, become oblate, and because of this, one should place the leech lower down for fear of oblate.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The wind-treatment on the neck is located where the sinus of the head and the basilic vein are, and for this reason it is good for constriction of the feet, and fissures in the canal of the lungs, and for puffiness and distension;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and one should not push it too hard, because if it is held too tightly, it injures the oesophagus or stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The wind-treatments at the side of the neck are good for headaches, and eye pain and migraine, and strangulation, and toothache, and are located where the sinus of the basilic vein is;
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and you should instruct the patient to express his hand when putting it on so that he does not compress the artery and cause blood to flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The venting below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and is where there are sores on the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings on the shoulders are good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The venting of the armpits is just as good as three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Instruct the bloodletter to not cut too deeply, because the area is bare of flesh and contains nerves and arteries underneath;
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass placed on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids in the anus, and for illnesses underneath, and it should be a large cupping glass made of iron, which needs to be well applied;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And if they are thin, they will break;Li ventosations desoz les cotés si vaut aux maladies de l’estomach et de la mesentere, et a les maux dou fond
et i fai grans plaies.	and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	Leg cupping heals quickly and openly, because it draws blood from the entire body, and is effective for old pains in the kidneys, and the bladder, and restores the flow;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	They are located at the two ankles and knees, and they weaken the entire body after long use, and bring on paralysis in many cases.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply the cupping is to first place it empty, and suck gently, and then press firmly, and move evenly, and not cease doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and the blood flows.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then wait, and replace the cupping, and take heed of the condition of the body, for there are some who have such thin skin, and clear pores:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	it is necessary to cut only once, and it must be a wide wound, and not too deep.li dolors de la piere se traittent as l’autrier fu dit, si avient plusors fois que li membres son defformez
et suce legierement.	and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to make the way for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the vein is very thick, it must be pierced a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only need to pierce once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want a lot of blood, we should do it frequently;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the vein is thick, pierce it deeply, and let the ends be such that the skin is pierced suddenly, and it is necessary to anoint the places of the cupping-glasses with an opening and dissolving oil for those who have tough and hard skin, and who have narrow pores:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is on the head, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is on an eye, use oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take oil of amarant, or of balsam, or dill oil, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one we heal has tender flesh and wide pores, no oil should be applied, but it must be washed after cupping with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from parsley, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those with large growths are cured by old wine, or dried water, or a potion of fennel or chamomile, or similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not good to bleed with a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but an hour or two after the bath;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and he should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he should stay awake when he is being bled and after he has been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And watch if the person being bled is choleric, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if he should eat cool things, such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce with garlic, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat little, and charcoal from a brazier, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those of a cold complexion should drink syrup of honey and moderate-aged fragrant wine, and eat little, and charcoal from a brazier, and moist meat;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day that he vomits, he should drink more than he eats;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men teliakle or musk before or after vomiting, to comfort the principal members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and dilute the wine, but those who are hot-tempered should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The leeches that are placed without bleeding are those placed on the liver, and on the mouse, and podagra, and on the belly and the throat and the rains and the hip, because these members do not bear bleeding on their own, and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we put them on breasts when nipples are sore.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to reduce the viscosity in the limb, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and buttocks to make the limb smaller
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and removes pain; when there is obstruction or stone, it removes the obstruction by its attractive power, or drives out the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and it does the same when placed on the liver and on the abdomen when there is retained wind; these cupping glasses are administered empty in order to suck only slightly;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy; and in such a way one fills the cupping glass with warm water, or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the fire cupping is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has a diameter of two digits and a half palm in depth, and on the side around the middle there is a small hole, as large as to pass a needle, and it is made of brass, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and has in the middle a crossbar of iron or steel, to hold a candle, and they are both large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the elderly, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must thus place this cupping glass upon the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the candle of wax or tallow, and place it inside the cupping glass at the crossbar in the middle of the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass and does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it upon the limb, and your fingers must be over the hole that we have described, so that when one wishes, the vapors go out, and one removes the cupping glass;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and they take the tallow as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping glass therefore which is administered for disease of pleurisy, with all acute illnesses, has no tube or opening, and is not removed until it is full of fluid, and is placed on the limb only by itself.
et c’est li forme:	and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Leeches are not removed until in members where one cannot place cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in bare flesh, such as breast or nose, and others similar;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of its use is such that when you find leeches that are in clean, sweet water without mud, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put one into clean, sweet water, until they become familiar and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then cleanse with a vein opening and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the leeches;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are flat and swelling, if it is possible to put a cupping glass on them, then one should do so, for this is much better.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then raise the area with a pillow, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it out.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the bite is too far from the body of the snake, then wet a linen cloth in cold water and place it over the bite until the swelling goes down;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if there are many bites, then apply ground vitriol or gall, and similar things, until the swelling goes down;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you can place half a handful of peeled peas over the bite and leave them until they warm the area, which will stop the bleeding immediately;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, then catch other snakes.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the snakes do not want to be caught, then rub the bite with fresh blood or stab it with a needle so that the snake's venom comes out, and then place them over the bite, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will warm up.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see them defecating, then powder on a little aloe and ash, or charcoal, they will stop immediately.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear reader, that the fools mock this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient book nor read any letter of it;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason knowledge is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing about it except through the knowledge of ancient books, from which I have studied so much that I have attained to its science, and through experimentation, and through the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and abbreviated at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in these two chapters above.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the sums of the matter and the chapters in which the sage places his understanding, and dwells upon their truth, so that those who have experience know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising befalls someone, you must hurry to heal the patient from one side and the other, if any part does not heal him completely, as in weakness of the body, or children, or the elderly.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the weather is very hot, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and eat cold foods, namely cold meats and meat from young animals, and drink no wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not eat too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have reason to suspect a hot abscess or inflammation in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the illness returns under its first treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the broken bone begins to heal, the patient should be nourished with foods that promote swelling or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pigs' feet, pig's belly, eggs, fresh fish, and full-bodied wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because with such nourishing the swelling will subside and the break will heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the old and the weak cannot heal well or knit together according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but have no concern, reset on the broken bone The thick tendons that pierce and join the limb together, so that it enforces as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not stop there, but also tend to the surrounding broken bones, and for this one needs to feed thick meats as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you should know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different than the fracture of the foot, or of the leg; and in this chapter I will tell you about all types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another that is only skin deep, like the cut of a quill pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that is just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each manner has its own technique, and a unique instrument for restoration, according to the memory that comes to mind;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and one can tell if the bone is broken by how it feels twisted, and clearly appears deformed when pressed with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting or deformity to touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no break;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can still have twisting, or fracturing, or a minor break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not advisable to move it by hand, but apply remedies that come later, and then hold it firmly but gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that breaks that occur in the arm, where the two parts are separated, they must now be put back into place evenly so that abscesses will heal;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if hot abscesses come, then let them remain for a day, until the abscesses are soothed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then set it even with the others as quickly and smoothly as you can, knowing that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of those that have pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then stretch it, as appropriate afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces of bone, if it is in two parts, whether it is an arm or a leg, or to the hand if it is a small member, or to two cords, or to one cord and to the hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are brought together, you bring them by all means into their places as smoothly as you can, and be careful that your action does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if you set it well, and do not pull too hard, nor press as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb by their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is healed, take care that the patient does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and be sure that the limb is so secure that he feels no pain.Et s’il y a grant dolor, et ne peut demorer en tel estat, si le covient esprouver par autre maniere
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet healed, and you should put him in such a position that he feels no pain;Et s’il y a grant dolor, et ne peut demorer en tel estat, si le covient esprouver par autre maniere.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and make sure it is put back correctly so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs vary in size, shape, and appearance.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small members like arms and fingers and similar things:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	then one should wrap them in soft and delicate linen;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, like thighs and legs;
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	then one should wrap them in a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the whole large member and constrict it evenly all around so that no crookedness remains;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then tie around it with light sponges, 3 or 4 times depending on the member, and tighten your hand all around the bandage, then go above the dislocation and tighten less so that the dislocation is pushed out a little;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the ligament little by little, until you grip a large part of the healthy tissue, then take another ligament, and return around the broken area;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go to the part underneath the break, and grip gently, not too hard or too softly, as we have said in the first hour above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place between the ligaments, stuffing with linen or cloth until it is all even, then tie it all together above with a bandage, and then place your splints well-fitted above, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something hot above to reduce the swelling, and leave it thus for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then grip above your splints, and let them be of a mid-sized cane split lengthwise, or of wood used for making oars, or of palm branches, and let them be shaped thus:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary for the star that one puts on the break to be a little bigger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and also as long as it is convenient for the limb, small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then bind on the stars as you did at first, then tie a thread properly, just as in the first instance of the dislocation;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter it is, the better; less so, afterwards;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and the thread should be medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	because if the thread is thick, as I have seen foolish people make their ligatures with twisted cords, and that is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two threads between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is nervous because of the stars after the pressing in their healthy areas, then put under them flaxen lint or linen rags so that it does not hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should know that it is not advisable to manipulate all broken bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the member is swollen, it is not advisable to apply a poultice for more than five or seven days, or longer depending on the heat of the abscess.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And now here is the manner of ancient poultices to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And you should take flour from the walls of the mill and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common manner of the poultice that restores fractures in various conditions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another manner of poultice that restores fractures, dislocations, and twists:Prend les veines de lie, et le blanc d’uef, et met la veine de lie et le blanc d’
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take the veins of bran, and the white of an egg, and put the bran vein and the white, and the adder's tongue and daniel, and myrrh, and assafetida, and gum arabic, each 5 scrip.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloes, each 5 drachms;
alechil VIIII З.;	galangal root 1 ounce;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make into powder, and mix with egg white;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another recipe for a plaster that helps with twisting injuries:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take mallow leaves and violets, bruised, with oil of roses, apply this three times.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloes, mix together, nine parts.
acaice VI З.;	cinnamomom six parts;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	armenian bole ten parts, and grind well, and cook with egg white or vinegar, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their sockets, and it relieves pain, and wears away the bone, and breaks it:pren mirre et zibeth, ana XII З.;
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	take new lamb’s wool, moisten it in garlic and oil, and apply it to the affected area.pren saindore, et aloes, ana XII З.;
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and it removes pain cleanly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method of plaster which restores broken bones: take myrrh and civet, mix together, twelve parts;take mallow leaves, bruised, and violets, and oil of
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	take fig leaves dried, and leaves of ground ivy, and grind them together, and make a plaster.pren saindore, et mirre, ana XII З.;
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster to restore the fracture of the bone, and to reduce the remaining abscess: take new linen, and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take the root of marshmallow, chamomile, violets, and wheat flour, one part each.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Grind them and make into an ointment with wine, and if the member is burning, make it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger method of plaster, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.Take the juice of leeks and onions, and mix with vinegar, and apply it to the affected area until restored.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take marshmallow roots, and flax seeds, borage, milkweed, and violet and chamomile flowers, one part each.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Grind them and make into an ointment with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hyposurgeon writes in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to heal it except for a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it should be between soft and too hard.Et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs. Et s’il adveint qu’il soit trop sec, metez y oile; et s’il est trop moli, metez y cire; et si la brisure est grande, qu’on ne puet restorer, qu’on fasse cerote de cire et d’oile, et qu’on le broie tres fins, et qu’on y mette poudres d’armonie et de sante, et de violete, et qu’on le met sus la brisure, et qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen says that one should put on the broken limb, for healing, dry things that are slightly warm, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.Et dist galien qu’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit. Et s’il adveint que la brisure soit granz et profont, dist galien qu’on doit mettre sus la brisure cerote de cire et d’oile, et qu’on le broie tres fins, et qu’on y mette poudres d’armonie et de sante, et de violete, et qu’on le met sus la brisure.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another recipe for an ointment that is good for injury and pain:Pren radice de vismalve, camomille, flors de violetes, farine de vez
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugwort and human hair cut in pieces, or bird feathers, and marshmallow, and mix them together, and grind them and make an ointment from it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	Then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor move the bone from its place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if you do not loosen it by hand for several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the site, or itching, loss of appetite, or swelling, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster immediately.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea moss soaked in water, and apply it to the site until the itching stops and the pain is relieved.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply cool linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it up with a bandage, until you are sure there is no hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	Let the inflammation of the limb subside, and the pain be relieved, then begin gently again with a little more plaster, and do not hold it as tightly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and gently until it heals.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is closed and red and painful and swollen all over, and you need ointment and bandages, then resume it, just as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, do not dislocate it until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And sometimes leave it for 20 days, depending on what one sees, until the fracture heals and the flesh comes close to the bone.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then restrain it more than before, and increase its food intake, as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see the area drier than necessary, know that infection cannot come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Then wash it with warm water when you dislocate it, and do so every third day, and loosen the bandage a little.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Through this process, infection will leave the limb, and it will quickly heal what the foolish do, who twist the limb.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is wicked, and so are the works of cowards; I see no other way than to leave it and do it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various methods of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many types of fractures, with various shapes and distinct causes;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone breaks all the way to the sinfist which is under the bone, just like an ax or a pole;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason, this type of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and the wound of these two fractures are large or small.Apres doit l’om medecin porver si li os est sanz espas, ou il y a
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a strike with the flat of the sword, or a cut, or from the collar bone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture that penetrates, which approaches the membrane beneath the bone, or is on top of the bone; this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	Then the doctor must determine if the bone is without space, or if there is
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is made by a stone or by falling, or by similar things, and the bone goes in below, and the place is shaved smooth as the blacksmiths do when they work on pots.
si entre li piere dedens.	if the stone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have soft bone at the top, as in the head of an infant;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens with all these types of fractures where small pieces are dislocated, like tiles;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak about this in detail.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by their deformity, and by the inquiry into the tent, and by the corruption of the flesh that is above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairline fracture is known because when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on top, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to the accidents of the illness; and if you see no malicious accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, loss of consciousness, extension, paralysis, fever, eyes popping out and turning red, and other similar things in various dispositions, then it can heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no shocking accident, and you expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the baby comes to you first, and it is in winter, you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day when you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the summer, you should hasten to remove the foreskin before the seventh day, so that the skin under the foreskin does not become corrupted, and so that the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thus:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and you must grip the head of the wounded person firmly and expose the bone in every way that you can, and according to the shape of the wound as much as possible, and if blood comes out when you expose the bone, or an abscess forms, then aid him with what is appropriate, and you must fill the area with dampened pieces of cloth in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the abscess is drained and there is no more bleeding.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin around the bone to remove it, and this can be done in two ways:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one way is to cut closely in front, and that is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	and the other way is to have diverse cuts, some narrow and some wide, pointed, and made of iron:
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work gently, so that you do not cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce around it, so that you apply cuts with chisels, not deep enough to penetrate through the bone, and it should have a rim or circle on top, preventing the point from going through the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you should have several of these, so that each one comes in its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have chisels for all parts of the skull;
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and there are three types of cautery:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you must place the cautery on the bone and move it with your fingers until you feel the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then move the cautery elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut into the space between the bone fragments with the incision, and do this as skillfully and gently as you can, as we have said, until you pull out the bone with your hand or with one of the instruments you have, such as tweezers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	Be careful not to touch the brain or the dura mater.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and pulled out the bone, it is necessary to remove the membrane that remains attached to the bone with another instrument similar to a scalpel, but it must be more flexible and thinner than the other scalpel;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it remains stuck in the small bones or any scales, then gently dislodge them with instruments.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound with tenting and poultices as we have described.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer:
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and he highly recommends it, and his word is law.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open and moving. Once you have uncovered that part, place under it the cutting edge of this lens-shaped instrument, which is its shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side only, as the wound will be deeper on the bone side;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then gently strike with a small mallet all around so that you slightly move the bone all around, taking care not to damage the membrane underneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is attached to the bone, then gently move the bone, for it can be moved without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture does not penetrate through to the membrane, and the bone is cut only slightly from above, with small pieces, then one must remove this roughness, and take away the scales with a very fine rasp of which you should have various sizes, in order to smooth each part according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use a large razor at first, and then a finer one afterwards, and do not stop doing this until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	For all other hairline and subtle fractures, you must treat according to the specifics of the case;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is something that has not been answered for one who has dedicated their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is exposed, one should press a linen bandage according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another bandage doubled into two or three, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first bandage;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this as gently as you can so that you don't burden the wound, then administer another bandage on top, and don't tighten it more than necessary so that it only presses the wound;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it be like this for one or two days, until the abscess is soothed, then loosen it, and administer remedies such as lily roots, and flour of beans, and incense powder, and aristologus, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and from these things make a powder, and apply it to the wound, and then administer other medicine without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and ensure that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any oil or allow any pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the brain's membrane, it will corrupt and cause great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one applies something biting to a wound, it numbs from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, that it is without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness does not disappear but only becomes worse due to the medicine applied, one should mix a portion of honey with three portions of rose oil and apply this mixture to the wound using a bandage.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat it in the usual ways until it heals.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	You should know that sometimes both parts of the nose's bridge are broken, or just one part, because there are two bones there;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and those below are cartilaginous, and do not break, unless they are bent or twisted, and then heal.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should press your little finger or hole of the nail, and place the break inside your index finger, and hold it in place with your thumb until the nail returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the fracture is above the nose, and the bones cannot be aligned, then you must place it evenly at the end of a rather thick thread.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, do the same, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can;for si li malaide demore longuement, li brisure ne velt selonc sa figure natureil, mai est contors a la figure del membre, et aler se contors en
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if the patient lingers long, the break will not return to its natural shape but distort the shape of the limb; and it will remain distorted unless, on the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses have healed, you press the head of the nail with tent-like pieces of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you sew him up elsewhere, if the wound is there.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and the stitches should be so large that they fill the holes in the nipples.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must moisten the tents with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	I do not think this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened with an egg yolk and flour;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the stitch in place until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes we sew in goose feathers instead of stitches, and wrap it with a thin cloth, and the dislocation is held in place, and the patient breathes among them;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do what you want.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working on it, then put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a little diaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if a wound comes to the nipples, put on a poultice, made from flour of vetches, and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put on top light lint, and do not tie it to the nipple;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with instruments suitable for this purpose, then close the wound, and treat things that are out of joint, and mend, as with plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tenting and put in canes of lead until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of a broken jaw:
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken underneath and there is no open wound, and the break is only on the surface and not broken in two, one can know it easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your index finger into the mouth of the patient:
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then put your index finger of the right hand and put pressure on the fracture gently and pull it with the other hand equally.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced in .ii., then you must administer an extension of .i. parts, so that it is equalized.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if there is movement of the teeth, or dislocation, then hold them in place with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, and then put over the broken jaw a cerote, and put over that a double cloth;
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and place on top of the wound a well-made bandage, or a piece of leather equal in size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it as tightly as possible; and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the jaw is changing shape, then loosen it for three days, and then reset it to its original position.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply a poultice on top of that, made from ground powder of egg or flour of millet, after you have removed the kerchief.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and apply a light bandage on top of the poultice, and if the poultices become soaked through, and the patient's condition does not change, then leave it until it heals.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	It often heals within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a hot abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a break and wound together, examine it to see if any bone is missing;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	So skillfully hide from them the implements needed for this procedure.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, dilate it with flame according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then close the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The bone is broken in several places in front of the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	1. it is broken and separated into two pieces, which is the easiest to heal;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	where there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the procedure is the same when the break is without a wound: you must have two assistants so that one can hold the shoulder where the collarbone is broken,
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other stretches the neck towards the affected side;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Then put the broken bone back into place with your fingers, so that it is set correctly and there is no displacement or gap.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend it further, place a round pillow of cloth or wool underneath the shoulder, as thick as needed;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and stretch and gently pull on the collarbone, while pushing the pillow away with your hand, so that you reset the bone in its proper place.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull out the head of the dislocated shoulder, because it comes up very tightly, then the patient should lie on his back, and put something under the shoulder, an ear, and the assistant pushes the shoulder down while pulling the arm upward, until the bone of the shoulder is dislodged.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then press the bones together with your fingers, and if you find them loose, then you must split them;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and gently pull on the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined due to any swelling, then cut at one of the incisions that you have made.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but you must put under pressure this instrument, in order to push out the pus:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it should be shaped like a spoon, and not sharp, and as wide as is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the action;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it has two heads, as you can see, and one is wide and the other narrow, according to the nature of the wound that you have made when you pulled on the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure that there is a hot abscess, then cut the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt there is a hot abscess, then dress the wound with bandages and bandages, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses appear, moisten a cloth in rose oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The stretching of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fracturing, is to place on the bone the plaster made from mill dust and egg white, and put light bandages on top, and place a sphere underneath the splint, if you need one.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very large bandage, one palm wide, then put the double drape on top of the bandages and plaster;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a subtle needle three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And place the needle on the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy scapula, and under the injured scapula.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And reset it from each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture in place satisfactorily, and you clearly see that the needle does not move over the broken bone, then release it a little, and when the ligature slackens, constrain it again.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and let the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under his shoulder to raise the shoulder joint;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if it eases the fracture of the collarbone by aligning the shoulder, then tie his arm to his neck and do not untie it unless an evil accident happens, for up to 20 days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then renew the poultice, if you see that he needs it, and keep him so, until he is healed;and let him not wear a garment over the shoulder, but rather have the arm bare, to see how it goes;et s’il li vemme de la pluit ou del puais, et qu’il velt le taster, faiz le coger ou un chas o si
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and if pus or blood comes out and he wants to taste it, let him catch it on his finger;if the wound is healed within 28 days, it is restored in less time for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It sometimes happens that the shoulder dislocates or breaks, and they do not feel any pain except through touch;and if he feels pain in his shoulder, it is because of a wound made by fire or cold, or a fall, or a blow.And if the wound is deep, it is necessary to open it,
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	then set it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put on the site powdered flour with egg white, and light dressings, and place over it a doubled-over cloth;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then place a wide and thin board, slightly wider than the shoulder, on top, and if there is swelling beneath the board at any point on the shoulder, stuff that area with linen dressings so that the board lies flat and even. Then;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then tighten it with a large bandage firmly, so that the board does not move from its place, and check the dressing every day. Then;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and whenever it softens, tighten it again and reset the board if it has moved out of place. Then have the patient lie on his side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this time is completed, he releases it and is sure, because it is not an easy bone to set.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone protrudes forward, and not beneath the heart, they should push it up, and the bone, and do as we said in the breaking of the forceps to soothe the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The penis is sometimes broken in the middle, but that rarely happens;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the tip.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it bends downward, and the patient feels great pain and weakness throughout his body, and sometimes vomits blood, and there are open wounds in the broken bone, which he feels with his fingers.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and he puts a pillow between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders, and brings together the sides of the two ribs with his hands, and carefully ensures they are even in all ways he can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then he applies plasters and poultices on top of the splint made from light wood, and wraps it in a cloth, and ties it onto the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the bandage smoothly to the back, and tighten it skillfully, and check every hour that the wound is not softening, and if it softens, tighten it.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it needs to be loosened because of corrosion or itching at the site, or pain or an abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and scrape off the ointment, and address what has come about in various ways.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the ointment, and tighten it until it heals.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the fracture of the ribs only occurs above the back, and in the chest, and they only bend because they are slippery.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and you will feel it well on examination in those places.Et s’il adonques arrive qu’ele soit brisee, il cov
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is to set the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the ointment, and bind it with a cloth, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the fracture of the ribs is inward-leaning, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, just as with pleurisy, because the bone punctures the membrane.Et si li brisure des costes est vers le dos, il sent pointure et dolor, car li os deffend la toile;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and has pain in his fingernails, and feels nauseous and vomits a great quantity of blood, this is a serious illness, and the physicians have given him strong medicine.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, unless hot abscesses come to it, if they have not come to it already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come to it, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And some say that cupping glasses should be placed over the area to draw out the poison, and this is reasonable advice:
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is a doubt that the cupping glass will attract the excess fluids due to the weakness of the patient.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the area with soft lamb's wool soaked in hot oil, and place a tent between the ribs to ensure even pressure all around, then it should be bandaged with bandages of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure through the bone that punctures the skin, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should split open the ribcage over the site of the broken bone, and place a instrument underneath to push out the infection;
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then split the bone, and gently pull it out, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if swollen abscesses come, then put wet cloths in rose oil, and put them on the affected area;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the area around the abscess as needed, and let the patient lie on his side where it is, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	from the fracture of the neck:
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes there is a fracture in the collarbone, and it can be dislocated;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note if their hands are soft and swollen and numb, and they cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many ways, and if they are numb and feel pain when you stretch or pinch them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the illness is healed, if proper care is given.And si li mains ne sont pas mollifiiez ne enflees ne mortes, et les sent bien quant on les estraint, sache que li maux est de la chair ou de la peau et qu’il n’est pas de l’os; et si tu le mets en cure, il sera sain.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if something similar happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if he is healthy or not, then see if his feet are numb, and if the senses are in his hands, and in his back there are wind and urination without will;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when he lies on his stomach, there is urination without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is placed on his back and he wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is fatal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if there is no improvement in the treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these effects do not occur, then the condition is less severe.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure is that you must examine if there is a hot abscess, and put rosy oil or hen's egg yolk on the spine until it is soothed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and not to sleep on the painful part until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone is dislocated, it must be put back in place;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one stitch, then the doctor should treat it with ointment and bandages until it is healed;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", put your left hand over it and your right hand underneath it, then apply the poultice and bandage it if necessary.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then they bind it, and if there is bone exposed, they cover it with skin and then the wound is healed until it is cured.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It rarely happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does, there will be little thinning at the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And they make it long, and decline towards the buttocks, and comes to the patient's pain in the area, and piercing, and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as far as you can reach the break;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and know which is the break and its shape;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the break is only at the head, put it in place so that the break is even and the joint is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	If the fracture is long, or if it slopes downward, have the patient lie on his stomach until the healing of that fracture is prepared for.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have put it in place, apply the ointment, then put on a splint of wood or horn and bind the break so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and employ the cautery underneath the ribs, until the skin is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if a boil comes, do not touch it, until the boil has subsided, and apply what we have mentioned before;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to healing, and restrain it as appropriate, if there is no bad incident;
et c’est li maniere.	and that's the way it is.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder joint is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is to take a plain staff of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two ends together, and hold them upright, and seat the patient on a bench;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then let him swing his broken arm over the staff, until he reaches the bottom, and have a curve in the staff, then lean over some heavy object or have the minister hold it down below;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then place the splint on the fracture evenly with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is to have the patient lean on his elbow, and tie his hand to his neck; then have one minister hold what is above the dislocation in their hands, and the other minister hold beneath the dislocation, at each end of the rod, and stretch each end in opposite directions.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you want the extraction to be more thorough, then tighten the ligature below the fracture, and above it as well, and each assistant must do their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, you should place one strap underneath the armpit and the other towards the neck, underneath the fracture.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And if the fracture is towards the neck, then one strap should be placed lightly and gently, without labor, so that the fracture is aligned with its place, and with the neck.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then align the fracture as it should be, and bind it, if no abscess comes of it.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if a swollen abscess comes of it, then do not bind it for 7 days, but place soft wool in vinegar and rose oil on the swollen abscess until it is soothed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then you must restrain it, and the way to restrain it is to apply the ointment to the fracture, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or the chest;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and apply the bandage, and restrain it onto the shoulder and arm, so that the arm is held in place, unless something dislocates it or the bones move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you fear that the bones will move, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint over the fracture, and have two inches of space between each splint, and make each splint large enough so that it extends three inches on each side of the fracture;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then restrain over the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the fracture, more strongly and less widely.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the position of the stars and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, then let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then examine the bandages every three days to ensure no itching or swelling occurs, and that no pus can reach the member due to it being too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the abscess, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, then remove the bandages after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and place underneath the shoulder a plain woolen pillow evenly, and examine every hour of the day or night that the broken member does not move, nor the bandages become soft.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if he is treated with medicine, and is given the food we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food reaches the subtlest parts.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when he begins to recover, then it should be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to take forty days to heal completely;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one should loosen and administer baths and medicated oils to help it heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it remains to be released for 50 days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "foscile", one of which is small and is the one that follows the armpit;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and is the one that is underneath, towards the little finger;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance, only the large foscile may be broken, or only the small one, or both together.Si li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bones are broken, their restoration is easy, and so is their healing.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large bones are broken, their healing is difficult, and more painful than when they are broken all at once.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only a small bone that is broken, then one must extend it slightly and put it in place.And if a large bone is broken, one should not extend it too much, but put it in its place with a little extension.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is a large bone, one must pull harder;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and stretch him out on a pillow, and raise the pouch of his hand higher than the others, and the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross himself over his chest, and the pillow in front of him higher so that the patient does not suffer any strain;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the minister's right arm to the part below his hand, or to the armpit, and another minister to the other side above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the bandages on evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the bone has broken into pieces, place each one in its proper position; and if any have become dislocated, and you cannot restore them to their places, then cut through the bone, as we have described earlier.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the break there is a wound, I have spoken about it in a particular chapter;
si pren la cure.	if one takes the remedy.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration, abscesses occur, then apply a plaster made from rosin oil and white wax, not too hard or too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and apply the plaster gently, until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	Then remove the plaster, and apply the ointment made from mill powder with egg white, then put on the bandages, and let the bandage of the fracture be a bit stronger, and a little larger than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that he must have six bandages on his arm in various places:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the fracture is in one or two bones;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and always lessen it as I said at the beginning of the chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the bandages which are on the broken bone be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread, with which it is bound, be of flax, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And re-examine the limb and the joint after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching coming to the limb, then you must moisten the limb with warm water until those itches are relieved;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be bound tightly so that it can rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then renew the binding, and if the ligaments are relaxed and the bones dislocated, and similar things, then correct it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if one must guard against the nutrients not being able to reach the member because it is too bound up, then one must loosen it a little and leave it thus for some days, until the nutrients flow to it, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happens to the patient, then do not loosen it for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	or twist around, then he can hold his hands to his neck, and let his neck be straight, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this dislocation is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and on the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from many foldings.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should cut a cross in it and sit upright in front of him evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then put his hand on the extended towel, and extend the broken bones, and make them equal with the other bones, so that they are well-joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and put on a poultice and bandages, if an abscess does not come, then he puts on a plaster according to the quantity of the wound.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the break is around the palm, towards the belly, then make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against the broken palm.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And then he pulls on a long cloth, and the splint should be of cured pig's skin as large as the palm of the hand, and he applies it, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, you must put a splint on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the dislocation comes to us on one of our arms, if it is the shoulder, then we set it straight, as it should be.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and hold it with your palm, and if you see [it], put a small, straight splint to raise the dislocation, and do not move it;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the dislocation is in the other arms, such as in the index or one of the others, then we set it straight and bind it with the healthy arm that is next to it;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you bind them both in the same way, holding them still, or you put a splint on it, as on the shoulder;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and the preparation of a hot abscess, and treat that which comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The thigh bone is often broken, and one can easily see this when it turns forward and backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is to tie one above the fracture, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister stretches their band to their part equally;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and that is when the fracture is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, let one ligature be towards the armpit, and the other ligatures below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is close to the knee, then the band should be below the knee, and the extension should be upwards;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then put the splint on the bone evenly with his two hands, so that it is in its natural position, and then apply the ointment and the bandage, unless pus comes out.If the fracture is in the arm near the elbow: then put one band above the elbow, and the other below, and extend upwards; then put the splint on the bone evenly with his two hands, so that it is in its natural position, and then apply the ointment and the bandage, unless pus comes out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down first, then return to your work and treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	It is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You must wrap the broken bone with a long strip of thick linen, and tie it tightly, then bring the leg so that the heel touches the root of the thigh, and push a long needle between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come out at the top;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh, then place splints over the fracture, and put a splint on the shinbone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to even out the pressure, then begin by tying three or four knots over the fracture;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and as you go higher above the fracture, tighten it less;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then tighten the two ends of the thread that you pushed between the leg and thigh, and tie three splints that are above it, then go back down to the end of the thread, until you reach the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and hold it so that it does not move from its place, then let it be thus, until no abscess or swelling or similar occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if something happens, dislocate and address what is happening, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of bone that prick, they should be removed, if possible;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if not, the place should be split and the bone pulled out;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and the wound treated as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the thigh is dislocated thus when a staff is placed against it, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Nevertheless, this restoration does not help the ailment.Et li remede de cest chapistre est de le deslieer et de le retreire, et de l’estrecier
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you shall know that the neck is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the variety of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the fold of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the bend of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then there is only a crack or an opening, and it happens to everyone, with or without pain, and it feels good to all.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is to dislocate and draw it out, and hold it tightly until it is set in place, as one puts fingers together, as far as one can;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then apply the plaster, and place a round pad on top if necessary, and hold it in place as needed. Then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	he should use whatever is appropriate for each condition until the patient is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is properly called the "mustel" and the other the "foscile";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and all other fractures occur in the leg as they do in the arm, and the treatment is the same. If both bones are broken at the same time, then the leg turns completely inside out.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the small bones are broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and it can be seen clearly;
et torne desoz.	and it turns inside out.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Therefore, apply traction and make it even, and tie the bandages evenly.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	However, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the traction should be milder and gentler.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and apply it according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have finished your work, take two bundles of wood shavings that reach from one side of the leg to the other, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down to just below it.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap two bands around it above and below, and tie it in the middle as well. At this point, the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And some use a bed as long as the leg, and it is made of wood, and they put the leg in it to guard against movement, and they carefully do this at the site of the injury.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move the leg each day to see if there is a hot abscess or other incident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but sometimes there is a break in the bones of the foot and in both feet, and there is only bruising in various ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if it happens that there is a break in the bone of the foot, and you see the bones sticking out, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are protruding, and then press until they return to their place;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then apply the ointment and bandages on top, and place a small wooden board with two flat sides underneath the foot's belly, then tighten it to the foot comfortably, then wrap cloth around it, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find that the bones are healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the fingers are broken, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then put a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and make it a little wider, then put under the foot that table which I have said, and tighten it conveniently;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the table under the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let there be a projection on the top of the table to press against the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things which I have said about other fractures, from what we have already said;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each accident as it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bones of the woman's nature are broken, then make her sit upright, then lean her towards the side of the back, and hold her from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the ball with the nature of the cotton disease, and put in it as much as a thumb;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then stand the woman up, and gently poke her back a little bit, and then the cotton will jump, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and the bone will return with the thumb;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, take out the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for 7 days or so;
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	then the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, and tie it at the opening with a string, and fill the entire bladder into the nature;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the string until the bladder is inflated inside;
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the nature will then restore the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then it should be filled with cotton and left like that for a few days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the man's or woman's elbow is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these breaks are not concealed from those who devote themselves to its study and practice, and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the breaks indicate in many ways the correct path to restoration:
enten le donques.	Understand them therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In a bone that is broken, take a goose's throat and insert it into the bone;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh or shoulder bone or similar, that he be bled immediately, in accordance with the bleeding we have described earlier.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound bleeds, then add vitriol again, if you have nothing else; then reset the fracture in that same hour or day, if no abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses form, then wait until the third day to reset the fracture, as long as the abscesses are subsiding; do not touch them on the second or fourth day, for you would cause a dangerous accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible beneath the uncovered chest, you should gently place it in its proper position with your hands, with a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the dislocation does not appear to you in order to put it equal to your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its width depends on the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four stitches, depending on what he needs in each case of fracture.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	Let it be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend when you press on the limb while doing your work, and let it be sharp at the end, and thick from the middle towards the front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	It is called a 'splint', so that it is necessary to put the curved side on top of the protruding bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And when you wrap it once around, do so until it fits tightly, and let one end be even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is small and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, you must pare the head of the bone so that the instrument can hold it firmly.Et se li os ne vout point demorer a son leu, si convint que tu l’estrenges tant qu’il soit en son leu et en sa possance; car en ce cas ne peuit li membres valer.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then use an appropriate tool, either a knife or a saw, at your discretion;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then remove what remains in the bone of splinters and small fragments.Et si li os sont trop fenduers ou trop rompus, si convenable est que tu les brises, et si li estres de l’un et l’autre ne s’entrecongnissent mie
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Do this until it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with black wine vinegar, and cleanse if necessary.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put ointment or anything else on the wound that would cause pus and corruption;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer bandages when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not restricted by the dressing;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times they have done this with foolishness, causing corruption or death in some cases;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and it is the most delicate and soft of all dislocations.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is large and you doubt that a bad accident may occur as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then you should not put bandages on it;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around, instead of a pillow, hard, folded cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is puffed up, then remove what you have put on it and apply healing ointment, such as tetrapharmacon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and closed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary for the limb to be prepared in such a way that the bowstring runs downhill easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they remain for many days, and it cannot be souded but keeps returning apart, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so you should probe the wound with a probe and remove all these displaced pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the surface, or any other kind of corruption, then you should treat it according to what he said in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, as in the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not draw it out, but leave it alone until it can be pulled out;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	perhaps it will fall out after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can;et s’il ne puet chiere, si trais li os entor qu’il soit apertes, et metes entor
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if it cannot be pulled out, then cut the bone around so that it is exposed, and put in
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come after healing:
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and an ugly sight is the shape of the limb;et quant li os traie sus li membre, si metes entor de l’erbe c’est-a-savoir, sanz rime ne mesure, car il est hardi et n’est pas de nature.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and sometimes cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	So take care then, if we are wise:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if the minister gives constipating medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, so that you can prepare some of these things, or all together, and mix them with stinting wine, or with the yolk of an egg, or with garlic;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and apply it to the navel as a poultice, and tie it on tightly, and don't untie it for several days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then untie it, and do another one, until the swelling is gone;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you can strain it onto a well-made piece of linen;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	because the property of linen is that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, then cut it away, and scrape off the excess;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or have it removed by a barber, until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weakened after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains afterwards in the weak and delicate members, this happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	one reason is that it was bound too tightly and not as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many ligatures, and the member could not receive nourishment;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or because of too much bandaging;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of excessive movement, and not at the right time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because there is little blood in his body, and it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you should feed the patient and make the body soft, so that the blood is multiplied within him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and give him a bath, and bring him joy and leisure;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply pitch to the limb so that it draws out the great putrefaction, and often wash with cold water until the putrefaction is gone from the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	until the limb is straightened after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are open, and the form of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	if you do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many fools have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these practices are blamed, and great harm often comes from them, and sometimes death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	yet if the dislocations and injuries are fresh, then they should be washed with hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as leaves of marshmallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and apply a soothing ointment, such as well-prepared diaquillon, and take the mustard plant's mucilage and confit it with goose fat or sesame oil, and apply it on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you can take fatty figs and crush them with colon's hay, and similar medicines that soften quickly.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the joint is dislocated by constantly rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And movement must be applied to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the tortuousness is withered and hardened like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it should be cut carefully and gently up to the bone.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply a poultice and bandage in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, one should immediately bring it back into alignment without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, the area will swell, and perhaps it will be reset in place with pain.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	Therefore, it is not good to move it when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times it brings on spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then leave him until the abscess is drained.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then warm the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and dress each wound as it comes to the surface.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	There are two ways that dislocations can occur: either the jaw is dislocated and both mandibles are affected, or just one mandible is affected.
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	or they are slightly displaced from their joints and softened a little.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely displaced and hang down towards the feet, and saliva drips from their mouth which they cannot hold closed, nor can they close their lips around their tongue to speak.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in various ways.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if the dislocation is complete and finished, then you must reset it quickly and not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in such a way that the assistant grabs the head of the patient and pushes his fingers of one hand into the root of the mandible's joint within the mouth if it is a two-part dislocation.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two fingers of the hand be forced, to make them even;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften his jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he holds the mirror steady, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if they are stuck together, especially if both jaws are stuck, then treat them with hot water and oil, until you can move them slightly;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not stop trying to reset it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place wet pieces of cloth in rosin ointment made from rose oil and wax, and then bind it lightly with soft bands;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his head be between two pillows, so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor try to speak, but take light food, until the pains are relieved, and his jaws are bound;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not worry about opening his mouth to eat and drink, as long as the jaw is well-bound and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be put back into place within an hour, and are not converted to their place, then fever and usual sodden come, and sometimes stomach problems, and sometimes vomiting of clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then you know that it is a sign of death.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times, the person dies within seven days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder joint cannot be dislocated from within the chest or armpit; it is sometimes dislocated by force, and one feels it strongly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the ointment and bandage, and tie it tightly;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the jaw that is towards the ear cannot be dislocated;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it dislocates even once, then reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put on the ointment and bandage, and tie it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and so it is with the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	You should know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one is when it dislocates at the part of the acromion process below;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part of the scapula;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and sometimes it dislocates at the part above, and that doesn't happen often.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	It doesn't dislocate behind from the shoulder, and not within from the nerves;and it never dislocates in front or to the sides.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And sometimes it dislocates below towards the acromion process, especially in those who have little flesh, because in them it is very easy to dislocate.and it often dislocates to the side of the acromion process, but not directly behind it.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	In those who have plenty of flesh, it only dislocates to the sides and returns to the sides.It never goes directly behind or directly in front.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they get a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	You must therefore test it until you are certain of it;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And you will know that there is a dislocation when it is lower towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest difference between them;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find in the head of the shoulder a pit, and under the armpit at the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly at the top;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation can only be reset when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the way to do it is for the assistant to lift the hand of the patient up, then place your fingers under the socket, and forcefully lift the joint up into place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upward, then brings it back down;
si venra hastanment.	it will quickly come back into place.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come back as we have said after several days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the assistant should apply softening and soothing poultices, such as a decoction of alder and fenugreek and milfoil in water, and let it be applied;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient should be laid on his back, and a layer of equally soft but not too soft or too hard woolen cloth placed under the socket, then the assistant places their heel on the cloth and lifts the head of the shoulder gently but firmly, and pulls the hand of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another minister dyes the head of the patient so that it does not move downward;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	this shoulder will return immediately, and if you see that it is reset according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and you should have a man present who is larger than the patient;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and stand straight towards the shoulder, and press the shoulder underneath the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downward towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the dislocation is too slight, one can weigh it down with something heavy, and it will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is reset in another manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and one should stick a long thin stick into the ground so that its top is as high as the shoulder, and not too thick or too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be placed underneath the patient, but with a soft cloth over it, and the patient should be upright against the stick;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then extend his hand downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return despite all that we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a log of wood two feet in length and four fingers in width, which has been split on one side so that it can be inserted deeply under the shoulder, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then bind it with cloth below so that the log does not hurt the patient, then place it under the shoulder of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend his arm above the log, and bind the shoulder to the log, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on a wooden block two fingers in width, and let the hand hang down, and let the body dangle on the other side;
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the joint will heal now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however it may be, you should place under the joint a round pillow of wool, then apply the plaster prepared from flour with incense and egg white over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the joint gradually, and tie the string over the plaster, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And one must eat little, until the member is healed, for it will heal faster that way;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then eat more after a few days, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is stiff and not柔軟, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has moved out of place due to moisture or any other cause, you should administer cautery at three places, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	Dislocations which are towards the foot, and the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing, and stretching with hands, and one administers another remedy;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb becomes swollen and tender to the touch, and with movement, then the patient should use the bath many times until the swelling goes down and the limb returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	on the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated by the nails, and by the nails it returns.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and it is dislocated throughout, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one can see and feel it;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocate according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is crooked and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you should reset it as soon as the abscess forms, for if an abscess forms, then it will be harmful to reset it;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and indeed it cannot be reset at all, especially when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations and is more painful, and often death ensues.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration, when it can be reset, is to extend your left hand with your right hand;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and the arms should be spread out, and the hands held according to the nape of the neck, from behind and underneath, and the joint pressed at its root, or the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it will return when he bends his hand to his hand, and he stretches from the root of the palm the joint which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and are stretched by two ministers, so that it does not move during extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long, wide cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the minister has joined the joint of his hand, he should smear some oil to loosen the joint, then tightly bind the joint so that it heals;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, put on a dry poultice with egg white, and tightly bind it, and keep the arm still at the neck of the patient for some days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen the binding and leave it;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint is not fitting well, then restart the poultice and the binding, and leave it in this way for some days until it is firmly in place;
puis le deslie.	then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if there is great pain after the joint is reset and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until the pain subsides.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or you can put a fat sheep's knuckle on the joint, then leave it for a day and night, then remove it and let him enter the bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the knuckle back on, then enter the bath again;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and so do this twice or thrice until he is healed;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see that you put warm moist cow's dung with butter on it and press it onto the joint;
si revenra a sa disposition.	it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocations of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joints of the hand heal more easily and quickly than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it must be reset to its place gently, at the same time as when it was dislocated, otherwise the joint will become swollen or a hot abscess will form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And for the dislocation, if you put the patient's hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and look at it to make it even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it comes back.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, you should check if it is in the right place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then put the patient's back of his hand on a table, extending and bending it.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient should lie on his back with his hand flat on a table, and the surgeon should place his hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it comes back now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then strain with soothing poultices, and let it be without re-encombing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after several days, then the joint remains crooked;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and it does not harm the patient unless that as long as his hand is swollen, and he cannot strain anything at all;
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then you will know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is nothing else to do except to constrict by fire next to the wound, and by chance nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then apply the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes it dislocates the knuckles of the hand on either side, sometimes on the back of the palm or the palm;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then you must pull on the fingers, and put back in place with your thumbs as far as it will go, then hold the head of the finger, and push towards the part that is dislocated;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave for two days, and then reset it straight that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and bandage it as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and move it, and relive it at night;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often until it is healed, and do the same if it dislocates in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same when it is dislocated from another direction.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the sciatic nerve from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the sciatic nerve in the back or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death hastens the ailment.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the bowels move without voluntary effort, and he cannot hold it in, and many times a limb is relaxed, or both thighs or two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the skin splits in four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which splits at the back is called "dislocation":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the treatment, if the dislocation occurs in children, is to:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no healing, then it will never heal.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment are given in great detail, but they do not always bring great benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated them according to my understanding and created instruments in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that there is no healing or health in the dislocation that comes from the toe facing forward;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also those who come straight to both sides, and no one can cure except for those who properly come from the back, as I said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one place equally, and has a restraint underneath him, so that he does not bend;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then insert the brand into the ground at the head, and another under the feet, and tie a string under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two assistants handle the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the brands;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they are well secured, the brand as we have said, and the healer places his palms on the spine, until it is straightened out.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this treatment, take a table three yards long, and bend it under the wall, and the patient is on his side, and place the head of the table under the wall, then put the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and put his feet on the other end of the table, and press hard until it goes back into place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see that it turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should put two fires on the head of the sick person's arm, and two more on their feet, with a palm-width of space in between each fire, both above and below.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And in each fire there should be a hole where the joint turns, and the fires should be firmly planted in the ground so that they don't move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each pair of fires there should be a turning fire, above which the joint turns, and there should be two small fires on top of the turning fire, about a palm-width long, to turn the joint.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then tie the string that is between the fires to the joint at the head, and the other string to the joint at the foot, and each of the assistants turns their joint all along the string, and the master puts the spine in evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then apply a desiccant poultice with an egg-yolk, and then the towels, and then the carpet of a tablet three inches long, which purples the area of the hernia and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the subtle remedy for fainting until he is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if nothing comes of it in the end, then soft and soothing remedies must be administered with the carpet we mentioned earlier.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	sometimes a lump appears at the back of the spine in the lumbar region, and people think it is a dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that has appeared, so one should not be presumptuous about it:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	for it might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not become dislocated except through dislocation alone, nor do they become so like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inside and outside, and forward and backward;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more within chalks, and slightly dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee appears larger than the healthy one, and the diseased person cannot bend their knee to the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and is the place that is swollen with hot abscess due to the head of the thigh coming there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes from disuse, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of those who have it in front are that they are well-built according to their height;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Nevertheless, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if one tries to make them walk, they cannot, and they retain their urine, and the anus swells, and when they go to the toilet, they pass it over the heel.And if the disease is in the back:
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who has it behind, are that he cannot bend or double his knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The understanding of this kind of dislocation is that you examine whether the dislocation is old and it persists according to its nature, then there is no treatment for it.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and he must not have any presumptuousness.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And for those with a fresh dislocation, there are four types of dislocations; you should quickly turn the joint, stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	It may return on its own without needing any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, you must use a strong remedy and stretch the leg firmly with two hands, or with one hand tied to the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and someone else stretches his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then pulls with a strong cord on his thigh;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and someone else pulls on the head with a cord;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch him upwards and downwards all at once until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and then he hangs limp.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of stretching is common to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then you must take care of its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the hip, you must lead the patient up his healthy side, then place the ligature at the root of the thigh, and the place below the groin, then let the ligature ascend towards the groin, and towards the armpit.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then have another assistant grab his arms, and embrace the large part of the ill thigh, and stretch it forcefully in a proper manner.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	And if it doesn't return to its place immediately;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this kind of dislocation is easier than others.Et s’il ne retourne, tu peesche l’esgarnir et le raser: car
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot tie it in the manner we have described, then you must bind the sick man's two feet together with a strong silk thread below the two heels, and above the two knees, with the sick leg stretched out two fingers more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then let him be hung from the top of a pole, and let him be above the ground by two arms' length;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then instruct the minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and let another minister hanging with the patient embrace the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is healed, then let the patient lie down as we have said in that which has gout, and tightly bind the leg of the affected limb, and also above it on the thigh;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put two firebrands, one at the head and another at the foot, then insert the firebrand between the thighs of the patient in the groin;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have moist bandages placed around him so that he does not blink, then each minister should stretch out towards him, and the patient should hold the area of the dislocation with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on the table and press him as we have said in the gilet [a garment with straps that could be used to restrain a patient], and lay the patient on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is forward, then it is necessary to stretch the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and place his weight on the sore joint, then press with the other hand, and stretch it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is outward, then the affected person should not stretch downward or lift himself up from the ground, but he should be as if his hip were dislocated outward, just as we have said about lying on one's side on both hips;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and lie on his face, and the limb be stretched as we have said before, and one should press upon the joint while he is on the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be easily done when the affected person extends his legs, and they will become even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then adjust the thighs, and apply the ointment, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and rest for three or four days, then loosen it, and apply the ointment.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	And if you see that they are even, then strain them as before, and leave them for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then loosen it, and let it walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inside and outside, and behind;
et ne desalue point devant.	and it does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then you know it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all of them is that you make the patient sit upright and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee smoothly.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another assistant stretches his foot so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg slightly;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply the plaster, and straighten the leg at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three or four days, then loosen it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not make the patient move until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not at all, then administer very strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes fully dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and feels tender in the affected part;
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the range of motion should be slight, and one should gently straighten it with their hands when it is dislocated.Et li cheville qui est desaluée, si convient mettre sur une poutre, ou un trescot, et le pied de la cuisse au bas pendent;
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is fully healed, you should make the patient stand upright, and have one assistant hold him firmly by the leg, above the ankle;Et les II autres ministre par la cuisse, desus li genous; si doit il tenir droit et fort I jors entiers, quant il ne se traint mie soulement;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then draw up your foot to your right hand, then to your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards and pull the foot up firmly;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it works, that's good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, then start the operation again, for it will work;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it still doesn't work, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and push the passel firmly into the ground between his thighs, and wind cloth around him, so that he does not move the sick person;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then the ministers hold his thigh, and another minister stretches the foot to his hands or to his knees, so that he binds it onto the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each minister stretches equally, and the passels are then between the sick person's thighs to restrain him when he is stretched;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then have the patient hold the dislocation steady with his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return to its place gradually.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, then apply the plaster and padding on top, and stretch it firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and be careful of the nerves that are on the ankle at the back, that the ligatures are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandages loosen, then tighten them;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then release it on the third or fourth day, and the patient should walk slowly for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before that time, it is not safe that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a deep abscess occurs, you must calm it down as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	you must
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched gently without force, and this is a minor matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in the back of the foot, then you should have the patient sit upright on a flat surface or a table, and put your foot on what is visible from the joints, then press your foot firmly, until it returns to place;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place a board with two legs under the sole of the foot, then stretch it forcefully, and leave it for three days, then release it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When there is an injury with the dislocation and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not confident in the treatment, unless you are wise in the craft and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are not patient and merciful and slow to anger;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning of things soothing hot poultices, and let the patient remain in God's hand if you see no hope of healing;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, so that the hot poultices may work.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is exposed, then administer hot poultices to soothe the abscess and treat the wound, as appropriate, with drying ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a fracture with the dislocation, and small bones are displaced, then set the bones and follow the instructions given in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and beware of going down the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will bring you closer to your Creator, and for the sake of your soul and your body.
