O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the knowledge of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hand, that is to say, "surgery."
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hand is very rare in our region and is unfamiliar throughout, the knowledge has been lost and forgotten, and nothing remains but brief descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, errors and vanities have come about, intentions have been hidden, and knowledge has been distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now it seems to me that I should animate this treatise together with the order of this chapter according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good hand masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of members, and forms and conjunctions and separations of bones, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the moving and resting blood vessels, and where their outlets are.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hypocras says that the name with the non is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, beware that he does not err and harm people; just as I have many times seen several of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and lanced the arteries in her neck; so much blood issued out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; he carried away with it a part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if he had been cut open he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another case where a knight from our land had his leg broken, and with the break he had a wound; and the ignorant doctor bound up the break over the wound with tight bandages, and did not leave any padding on the wound, but left it like that, with a bandage; and he ordered him not to take it off; and so he remained, until his leg, foot and all swelled up and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to loosen his leg; and when I had loosened it he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	Nevertheless, the corruption had already settled in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another case where a doctor treated an abscess that was encrusted and then inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when a ulcer is purged of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron unless in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you need to know that the work of the hand is divided into two parts: namely, work where there is danger in various situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is danger and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	It is necessary that you guard against this, so that the foolish crowd cannot speak ill of you. Take up your arms in preparation, and undertake your tasks lightly and resolutely, using the best path, so that by the grace of God you may attain salvation and be praised; leave behind terrible diseases of the body, and remove your armor from what causes you doubt, having faith in yourselves so that you may pass from this world to one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in one of his warnings: "Do not concern yourself with illnesses that you may be called a foolish man.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is on fire cauterization and medical cauterization, and it is arranged from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and of cauterization tools, and all that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is on illnesses that come through the mastery of a bad angel or devils and through evil sorcery, and their treatments; and of the signs that are appropriate for these illnesses; and of baths and tools, and similar things; and it is arranged with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations, and twisting, and similar things; and it is arranged from the head to the feet, and describes the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So that we may remember the work, I should say something about the nature of aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most lengthy subject and subtle science, and the secret responses; and about this most of the sages have spoken, and agreed; and I am content with a little of their words, for I dread prolixity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally in all complexes where there is matter, for there are .ii. complexes: namely, hot complex without matter, and dry complex without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In complexions of hot and dry matter together, some people said that cautery is of great help; and others said the opposite, that cautery is of no use for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated for hot illnesses by heat, nor by dryness; and those who said otherwise claimed that cautery helps greatly with hot and dry illnesses that affect humans.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man to fire's nature, you find the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And yet, do not presume to apply this except for those who have experienced it and who know through long practice the use of cauteries, and the diversity of people's complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their recoveries and the timing; we fear not at all about other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agreed and concurred on the use of cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that a cautery combines fire with the secrets of healing, and has greater benefits than a burning cautery of medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm any other member if it is not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines spread from one member to another, causing diseases of the body; and by chance they kill the patient Fire, because of its intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experiment and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and stood upon the truth of things; and because of this, I excuse myself for the length of my speech, for it does not please me to take away the secret which is reserved for fire, and the quality of the work, how it heals the diseases of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration. So receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed upon what time the cauteries should be performed, and chose a suitable day.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the underlying harm is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cauteries are for painful conditions that are urgent and cannot wait until a later time when greater harm might come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for a disease that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say so, but it is not true as they believe, because cauteries are not medicines that change the complexion, but rather dry up the humors that cause pain, and are better than other medicines due to their swiftness, and because of the virtue of their action and their lordly nature.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And seek the time when the pain is urgent and severe; for in such a time cauteries are more effective than at any other; and it is fitting that it be performed in the morning or evening when the pain is acute. And it often happens that the disease comes according to the complexion of the patient, the location of the ailment, and its nature; and there are gathered within him excesses due to digestion and similar things, unless cauteries are administered to remove them, or if there is little excess moisture, as with toothache and similar ailments, and such pain does not return, but rather seldom.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine; but it is indeed so. However, they do not believe that cautery is better than medicine, their intentions are false. Cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cure for any illness and they are ineffective, then we administer cautery and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery with a gold instrument is milder than with iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold or because of its high value, but they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause swelling; however, this is not true, as I have experimented and found that it is true in some people. Cautery with gold is milder than with iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	However, when you heat the gold instrument, you cannot tell by its color that it is hot, and it cools down immediately; if it is heated too much, it will melt in the fire; therefore, there is enough precaution to take.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter of the head up to the feet, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two ways of doing it because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that flow from the head to the eyes, and ears, and because of numerous pains in the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a purifying, dissolving medicine for 3 or 4 nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can bear; and then have the head of the patient shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his thighs; then place the palm of your hand between the root of his nose and between his two eyes; and where your two middle fingers meet, there will be bleeding, then heat up the cautery, which is called "olive oil", and this is how it is done:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while pressing gently; then lift your hand gently, and check the bone again; if you cannot see it, repeat the cautery until you do as I have instructed. Then take a little salt, put it in a piece of cloth, and place it on the spot, leaving it there for 3 days; then apply moistened cotton in butter, leaving it until the blister is gone; then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they say that when a wound stays open for longer, it purges more, then use leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should leave the cautery for so long that part of the bone is burned, and then one should remove what is burned from the bone and it will heal.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should leave the cautery on for so long, and press so hard that one lowers the bone as wide as a woman's fuse, so that the humors may issue forth; then one must let the wound remain open for a long time; after which one should cleanse and dress it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem good to me in every respect, except in some people where there is fear; and I should rather leave it alone, for the shoulder is weakened by continuous dislocations, as we see in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first application of cautery seems more salutary and mild to me, then I employ this method together with healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When there is chronic pain throughout the head that lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills called 'cochie', as well as poultices for the head, oils, and plasters. If they are then treated with the cautery we mentioned earlier but it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is not too cold in nature; then cauterize it with that fire cautery which we described earlier.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and make another cautery in the place called 'vessel'; there is a place for placing leeches; and lighten your hand so that you do not reach the bone: the patient will feel much more pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be more subtle than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and its shape is as follows:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain arises in the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and one has done the other remedies that I have said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not help; then one should do cauteries according to two manners, that is to say, with medicine and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of medicine with garlic is that you press a clove of garlic, and remove the skin and cover it with a piece of cloth, and then make the poultice where the pain is in such a way that you can place the clove of garlic under the skin; and when it is placed, bind it tightly and leave it for 12 hours; then loosen it and remove it from the garlic, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then place linen soaked in butter on top until suppuration occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is healed; and if you see fit, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery of iron is performed in this manner:
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery tool until it is red-hot:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a clo [i.e., closed] with a slight curve, and in the middle has a small protuberance; and place it over the painful area, and hold your hand and twist it slightly so that half the thickness of the skin is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is deflected, and an abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterward put cotton in the wound, and place it there for three days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this emigrant with the cautery called  "cultellare", cauterize all the way to the tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this emigrant which is not old.
de emigraine	of an emigrant
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat an emigrant as we have previously discussed in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned of medicine and fire do not help him, then you must heat the cautery which is called  "cultellare" until it is white; and draw a line half a finger long on the painful area, and lift your hand once, and hold it so that you do not touch the artery and so that spasms do not come to the patient, and be careful of the mandibular nerve that causes muteness when one chews, and let the blood flow until it is halfway done; but I will tell you how to stanch the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the end of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear persists despite treatment with solutive medicines and other remedies as described in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery known as "poins", which has the following form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing all around the affected ear, or both ears if the pain is present in both, and moving slightly upwards from the root of the ear after you have identified the location of the pain; and have 10 poins around each ear; then treat the area until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which should be cured by cautery is only those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not cauterize appearances that come from dryness and nerve-swelling.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this appearance of torture that moves from fluid in the ears and purging from the head, and gargling, and it does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little further up on the temple, and the third in the junction between the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and also cauterize the top of the ear just below the horn of the head, and another one on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery on until half of the brain is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery tool:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of the scalpel that we mentioned earlier, but it should be a little more slender, and the blade should be a little thicker; then cure the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where the 'vassels' are, as we have said before; and the last cautery on the stomach's mouth; and let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of quicklime
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large and cleansing pills for the brain; then wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and place upon the nape of his neck the plaster of mustard seed which is written about in the treatise on plasters; and here is how to do the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries on the middle of the head, descending just to the neck, and have one inch of space between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if need be, two more on the two corners, and cure him as before. And let the cauteries be those which are called 'olive-tree', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and dirt as we have already said; then wash the head of the patient, next apply cauterization all over the head and on each temple, one behind and three on the spine; and if more is required, and the body is moist and the patient can endure it, and the illness is severe, he should be cauterized four times on the spine; allow it to burn until the heart is scorched, then lift your hand; treat the wound until it heals, and use the cautery we call 'olive' as mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic; first, the brain must be cleansed of hair and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section on great and suffering illnesses that require medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make them gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meats; after the king, put the head in the middle, and do to him one cautery according to what we have said before, and one cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and painful, do cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is in an infant, do to him one subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the humours are inclined towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink to purify the brain according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have applied the cautery to the wound; then make a little tourniquet of linen well-made, like a circle, and place it within the wound; and cross the bandages of the patient, and hold them tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment, and add some mutton suet of an old ram; heat it gently over fire so that he can bear its heat; then remove the circle inside the wound, and let it cool down; do this to the patient once a week with good management, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or, if you wish to cauterize him all over, make several small points on the cautery tool.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This cautery method moistens the brain greatly; afterwards, place wet cotton in butter and grease of chicken.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When eye problems first appear in the eyes due to the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient a drink that cleanses the head, and protect him from all moisture, and make him sweat or take baths several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands him to turn his head and cauterize inside the mouth, and make .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the swelling of the jaw extends to both eyes, or on one temple if it is only on one; and close all the veins and arteries under the skin, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with as much power as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and in making the incision, how to stop it; and sometimes a cautery or hatchet is made under the .ij. bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	where the body weeps
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed, and are on the veins or arteries that are visible on the outside of the head; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the jaw:  .i. cautery inside the mouth, and .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or hatchet under the .ij. bones; and if there is a need for more, then he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all over.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	where the body weeps from within them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient a drink of leeches for three nights; after that, cut off the hair at the top, and cauterize him with olive oil in the middle; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two sorces, one little below the ears; and be careful of the artery so that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this tool called «olivare».
de coi ci est li forme:	It is formed in this way:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see so do .ij. cauteries on the .ij. warts as long as the sorcerers are; and don't leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pokes the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hair of the eyes is turned towards the eyelids, and pokes the eye, and one must do cauteries according to 2 methods: that is to say, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; after that, draw on the paper a figure that is as long as the eye socket, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then moisten cotton with egg white and apply it to the eye, then heat the cautery so that its shape is there:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, cauterize a little bit at a time over the figure you drew until it is burnt in place; and the sign of the healing of the work is when you see the paper pull back and the hairs rise up towards the eye socket; then lift your hand and leave it as is for 3 days. Then apply wet cotton with butter to cool the burn; after that, treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs grow and the paper softens, then start the cautery again in the same place as before; and if the hairs are ingrown, cauterize until the paper returns to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make a piece of parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrrh; then take French soap and live charcoal, each one half a denier, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you made like the leaf of myrrh, and apply it to the paper around the eyes; and if the disease is in one eye only, then operate on one, and if both, then do the same; and put under the eye wet cotton with egg white; and let the patient's hand be in a healthy state and place your finger showing over the medicine, and press it gently and move it every time the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he will feel the bite as much as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, lift up the eyelid, and examine if you can see the membrane raised as it was by the fire or by the incision; if so, all is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply medicine to the eye again, as many times as necessary until your work is complete and the eyes are healed; only then, stop using the medicine called «dyafenis» and others, once the wound is closed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to take great care in your work that it does not leak any medicine into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then start the medicine again on the area that has softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle twig:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of humans are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be adjusted; and do not rely on the correct path for one who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should apply cautery according to the following method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your lap, and hold their head steady so that it does not move or nod; then soak cotton in white vinegar or in juice of purslane and place it on the fistula; next, heat the cautery, which should be made of iron: it should be shaped like a pen-knife blade, and curved like a sickle; though any curved shape will do for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula if it is open and draw out any pus, then dry it; and if it is closed, pierce it and draw out any fluid; next, place the hot cautery firmly on the fistula, hold your hand on the cautery near the knuckle below the eye, so that your hand does not shake; apply the cautery to the grease around the eye and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery all the way to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery again, and do so if you need to, and let it be for three days; afterward put on wet cotton soaked in butter, and cure it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then apply an corrosive medicine as far as the bone is exposed; and treat the king according to what he experiences in his body.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula which some of the ancients described.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Examine the fistula, and open it up; then put into the slit a thin cautery made from the excrement of which it is made.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	They make the amount of plaster about the size of a pea; and they hold the needle firmly in place so that the patient does not move, so that the molten plaster does not enter their eye. They then put damp cotton wool on the eye, and the plaster fills the fistula, healing it miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have described, that is good.But if it does not heal, do the following:
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, you must make an incision in the skin, and bring the fistula out of the body through the skin, according to what is appropriate, in a suitable location.And you should do this when the moon is waning, because then the blood flows downward, and so the wound will heal more quickly.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur in the lips that are called "whiskers," and especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it gently in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; then treat the area with cerotum until it heals.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and then causes swelling and rot and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in sections, and it does not help: then you must have .i. cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and in the opposite direction; and do this once or .ij., after treating what we have said about treatments, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then you must expose the site and remove the rotten bone, according to how you find it in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't help, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery, which will be described below, in such a way that you place a candle on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, repeat the cautery according to your desire; after filling the patient's mouth with salt water, let them gargle for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a way, the tooth that was loose is made firm, and the gums softened are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of dental pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When dental pain comes from coldness, either because of cold or damp weather, and medical treatments do not help, then two types of cautery are needed: cautery with butter and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery: take butter from a cow, and the tip in an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and moisten it in the butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools down; do this frequently until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you moisten wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and place a hot iron on top until the fire reaches the gum around the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cautery: heat a piece of iron or steel, thick enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, so that the shape comes out afterwards, put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be relieved on the same day or the next.And you should do this when the moon is waning, because then the blood flows downward, and so the wound will heal more quickly.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good wax in preparation for this cautery, and then let him spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cautery on any tooth you want, according to what you have power over; and this is the shape of the rod:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is due to phlegm and cold moisture, and is not responsive to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery, whose shape is described below, with which it has two openings for the smoke to emerge from one end of the cautery; place the hot cautery once on the abscess where it is needed, so that it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days. Then moisten cotton with wax and place it over the burn until it heals; afterwards treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture overwhelms the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with solubilizing medicines; after that, cauterize at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go any higher than the throat, and don't burn the heart but just a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, apply another cautery at the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and use the cautery called "clavicle", as described before; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.Si li malaide vient par moiste et que li saing ne fuet pas voidiez, adonc covient que tu le voidies li chief des costes per les costes dou corps, et li col a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee; et si li saing fuet voidiez et le malaide demouret, adonc covient que tu le voidies li chief des costes dou corps, et li col a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee; et si li saing fuet voidiez et le malaide demouret, adonc covient que tu voidies li col per le bas en l’endement de li col; et si li saing ne fuet pas voidiez et li malaides se demourent, adonc covient qu’il soit cauteres par le costat des espines, car il demoure la moiste par les espines et li cierges.
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the lungs are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is chronic, then let him have two cauteries on the breast in the hollows; and another cautery between the breasts, and let the cautery be called  "clavicle" according to the form that was described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, do cauterization by puncturing with the entire cautery that is called "points", of which the form is as described in the illness of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or around there.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards treat the site according to what has been previously described, and let the cauteries be at three places according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And so are cauteries lighter, because you make three of them.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards soothe the patient on his back and on his ribcage; then lift the heart which is inside the chest with your left hand's index finger and thumb; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two horns like this: [image]
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the vein until it pierces it, and the figure of the cautery comes together with four cauteries; and this is why there is a cautery made with a three-nerved cautery, so that there are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the three-nerved cautery:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted over that one nerve, so that there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, put crushed pepper on the cautery; afterwards, let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, which seldom happens, then do cauterization on the thick part of the cautery, or a lot of cauteries by puncturing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture has been removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When there are coldness and an abundance of moisture in the stomach to such an extent that it strains his complexion, and his catarrh is increased, and he does not improve with usual remedies and treatments, then the patient should be laid on his back, and his legs and arms stretched out.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this then afterwards make three cauteries, one underneath the heel of the foot in the amount of a thumb, throughout the cautery of the clave, and two cauteries from both sides so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and there is an equal space between each other so they are not joined together when they bend for pus; and the cauteries should be so deep that it pierces both parts of the heart, and the shape of the cauteries according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize a large cautery in the stomach according to this form, and one who has fear of this cautery, then cauterize by puncturing and marking on the stomach as desired; then cauterize throughout the cautery which is called "punctures".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the wound that we have mentioned before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver is painful due to cold and moisture and excessive winds, as it has been displaced from its natural complexion by excesses; and the patient is cured of this, as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, then the patient should be placed on his back; and make three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity over the liver, avoiding the hypogastric region where the navel is; and there should be the thickness of a thumb between each cautery; and the cauteries should be long and gentle, without pressing your hand too hard on the entire cautery; and only half of the chest should be burned, and the patient should be placed upright on his feet; and if he cannot stand, he should lie down, stretching his legs and lifting his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you wish to cauterize with the iron, be subtle and wise in your skill, and beware of burning the heart, for you would cause the body to wither; and let it not come too close to the bone, for the heart is a subtle place there, and you can tell by looking.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know whether it is in the liver tissue or in the membrane: if it is in the tissue, the pain is not too intense; but if it is in the membrane, the pain is unbearable.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this wound drains the pus, the patient should be laid on his back; then sign with oil over the location of the abscess, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a rod, so that it is shaped like this:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cautery until the scrotum is burned and goes up to the sphincter, until the foreskin is completely removed; after the cure according to the cure of bandages until it is healed; and one should not use this cautery without experience in the art of medicine.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can perform it confidently, but nevertheless I think it better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	with a cautery of phlegm
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must make cauteries of aristolache root on phlegm, and in this way: Take an aristolache root as long as your little finger, the largest you can find, dried out, as thick and as long as your two fingers; moisten it in oil, heat it up, and cauterize with 1 cautery between the throat and neck, and 2 small cauteries slightly lower down on the part under the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining slightly backward; and 1 cautery in the pubis, and another over the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and 2 at the sides of the pubis opposite to the cautery between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently as if using a scent.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient authorities say that a man should use a fire cautery resembling a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and if there is pain, as we have said in the liver abscess, then
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this procedure there is fear of death for the patient, or a fistula occurs that cannot be healed.Et si en l’incision ne vient pas sang, querrez li sang par le tret de costes sus la piere, et metez li cautere sus lor nassance, et teniez lor euil qu’il se mueve mye; si li sang viengne a lor nassance, teniez li cautere sus lor nassance.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the moon as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help at all, then there are three ways of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these there is one method in which you make three cauteries, or four, by tracing according to the length of the mole, according to the shape of the cautery which we mentioned before; and do not press your hand on the cautery throughout, and let the patient be careful on his back; and another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the curve where the mole is, or where the pain comes from towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the curve be according to the curve, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the breadth of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Afterwards, insert the two flaming points until the curve is pierced from the other side; and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four of them. And if you wish, you can cauterize throughout with three points.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has healed scabs for a long time, and this happens more than any of the other cures mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not effective for hydrophobia, except in the manner which is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure it according to the methods we have discussed in sections, and your cure is not effective, then you should do three cauterizations around the armpit, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the breast, two behind the back on the spine, and one in the groin; the cautery should be close to the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not cease the treatment after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the abdomen should be a claw as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown here.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in hydrophobia and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize between the little toe and ring finger on the bottom of the foot; raise your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, thus pressing against the yellow awl, and let the cautery follow this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make 2 cauteries on each leg at the tip of the tibia; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries in place for a long time without curing, until the water comes out; then cure the others that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When a belly ache comes from chill and moisture, the retentive and digestive virtue which is in the stomach and intestines becomes slackened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly with much strength, then do this: make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before regarding the cautery of the stomach, and make the cautery circulate; and around the belly make four small cauteries with a slender cautery needle, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, make cauteries on the shoulder, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of thick, cold, moist corruption, and have been treated as described in the section on division, but to no avail, then do cautery: III above the spine of the back, that which is completely removed below the diaper by poking gently and triangulating; perform cautery below the navel II times; and if you think the stomach is cold and the meat is not digesting, and one sees swelling in the face, then do a large cautery on the stomach as described earlier, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse with the entire cautery clove; and let the cautery remain open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the area until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut into the thelul, heat the cautery which is like  .i. razor, and then put it all heated on that thelul cut; and keep your hand so that the cauteries reach the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said. After cure the area with beneficial ointments until it is healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the armpit, it will provide greater relief.
de plaie mal curee	of a poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is an ulcer and it is discharged and suppurates with pus and corrupt moisture, then you should probe it with a thin rod and take care to find out the depth of the ulcer all around.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	Then heat the cautery as a razor, and insert it into the ulcer according to the amount that the probe entered, and repeat the cautery until the pus and corruption are burned, once or twice or three times, according to the amount needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the ulcer goes to the bladder and intestines, then be careful of these places, and do not make the fire too strong, and think that it is not sensitive; after healing the area until it is healed, and if the place is swollen, and the matter is discharged for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed; and if the matter is not discharged, know that the place is pierced, and the bone at the bottom is corrupted; and thus as one of those which we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes with rain and strong winds, and it does not subside with a woman's touch, then you must apply cautery to both sides of the rain with a hot iron as we have previously described; if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, which will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then you must apply cautery to the area above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the nail of a thumb; and you should also apply 1 cautery below the back, or 2 if necessary; and the cauteries should be performed with the hot iron as described earlier.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wound is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their termini tardy; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore it is necessary that one be made .iij. cauteries around the wound, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and .ii. cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be claviate, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistors descend to the box of the hip, and because of this they move out of their place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together; and it is found that the places of the division are hollow, then you must cauterize the patient on the box of the hip with 1 cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place all around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle; and let the cautery be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present to you, then make .iiij. cauteries of the olive oil large, and let the cautery be as deep as all the scabs; and cure it until it is healed.Et se tu veis ke li malaide ne se cure pas si grantment, si covient que tu le cauterizes sus la boiste de la hainche a  .iij. cauteres grans de l’olivaire, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the socket of the hip, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the disease is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-smelling pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the wound has healed, you must cauterize it. There are two methods of cauterization: using burning medicines or fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery has many methods, one of which is as follows: cauterize the hip bone in three triangular cauteries according to this shape, making them deep and wide, with a space between each cautery the width of a thumb. Sometimes a cautery is made in the middle of the hip bone, so there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you want, cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have already said about the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the whole hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is how it's done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and doesn't reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it extends to the thigh and leg, two cauteries are made where the patient feels the pain, and one cautery three inches above the ankle on the left side; the cautery should be cutaneous, burning through the thickness of the skin. And if the patient feels the pain extending to one or both feet, three cauteries are made, called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, make more cauteries; and if he feels that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, then use a scalpel or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cautery applied to the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot too, and it was pierced and corrupted all over the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach ache from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two places together, do cautery in one and the other, according to this manner.Et se li dolours sont en deux partiés ensamble, fais cautère en l'une et en l'auter, selonc cette manière.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip, that this is how it should be done: make the iron and let it be at the tip as large as a thumb nail, or a little less, and let it be pierced with holes and let there be spaces between them of the distance of the width of a thumb nail; and let there be bumps on both sides, and also like knobs, and let there be a handle well made; and this is its form:Et li sages dirent de la cauterie de la hainche, que ceste est la maniere: fai tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l'un entrechetre just a l'autre d'espaice la quantite d'un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi come noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c'est li forme:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it should be heated until it is all red and dripping, and then put it on the box of the painful hip, and twist it on the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery and leave it for three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the cure of anointing until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of its fearsome appearance, and few can endure it; and yet it is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured by those who know how to apply it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The medicine cautery burns if you make the instrument to interlace so that the edge of the door descends, and it is made of brass or iron with a long surface, and in the thickness it has 2 nails, and between each one there is the quantity of the thickness of a fingernail; and they are open beneath and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Afterwards place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and press your hand hard on the box of the hip; afterwards pour between the two circles of the hot wax which is heated in the fire a little, and let the patient bear the heat and burning of it for an hour.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is as if it were bitten by fire; and when the bites are passed, take your hand with the instrument and raise the hip gently, and leave it thus for 3 days, and apply butter until what is black from the scald is removed; and let it be for 3 days so that pus comes out; and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments as far as he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, you shall make the instrument that colors awe according to how you did in the hip joint; and that is the way of hot awe, and I have written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of each, and grind them together and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	In that pot with the small hole so that the point of a needle can enter; and place on top of this pot another pot well plugged, and put on top of the alkali and chalk and pour the gentle awe on top, as much as you have previously moistened it with your hand; and leave it so until there descends awe water and pieces into the plugged pot, then take all that awe, and pour it over the chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then there will be much pain and it is treated with many remedies of medicine and with cauteries of other members, for it does evil work like fire, and also with other medicines such as theriac and honey and aniseed with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells of a cure where a man was healed from the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he praised it highly, saying that no other treatment was used, and that the man was healed with just this one application, and afterwards he bathed as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he instructed how to apply litarge, green and dry, ground with a little fat, and place it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and leave it for three hours; and with the amount that the patient no longer feels the burn, then remove it.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter the bath until his body is a little warmed up, and let him enter the bed, and the pain will all leave and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's dung, it helps a lot; and the cautery must be performed in such a way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lamb's wool and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe of the foot and the one next to it, which is called the 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dry goat's dung and heat it in fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the lamb's wool, and let it remain there until it turns black; and do this again, and keep doing this until you feel through your sense that it reaches the hip and the pain ceases; and this type of cautery is called 'goat cautery'.
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes in the back, whether from sitting or a blow or from excessive evacuation, or by appearance of cold matter spread out, in none of these appearances is cautery useful except in that which comes from diffusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After the patient has been purged of foul pills or other means, you should make three lines on his back where the pain is located, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see fit, do .iij. cauteries or .iiij. with the medium cautery clavis according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often afflicts small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight and painful buttock when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance which comes over the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it being cured, then cauterize it with the cautery of celcle according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the purple cautery affects each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery tool, two or three lines in distance, and have the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards, heal the area until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be wary of administering cautery in a swollen area that is on a nerve ganglion.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of the joints is due to moistors that are spread throughout the body's members, and when the pain is in the feet, which the doctors properly call «podagra», and when it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured by medicine, then it is cured by cauterization in such a way: make the mark of cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to prick near the base of the foot, do cautery with all the tool that is called «point».
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, do cautery on each knee three or four times with all the olive-sized cautery tool; and if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand in place any longer than until the skin is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we mentioned in his chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make a point around the wrist two lines; and if there is no more pain in the arms, make a point on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good treatment to the patient and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	Because if you give him good treatment and cleanse the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rot of the eye socket
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rut comes in warts, and the bowels descend to the anus and it is new, then when you see him being treated, he must not eat anything that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the farts descend from his belly; after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the warts are repaired, and bring them up to your fingers, and sign with oil under the rut on the bone of the wrist, and all over a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery from which this form comes:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and bleeding.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then realign the bones in their place; and have him hold his hand up so that they do not return; and work the thighs for the patient, and put a cushion and a sergeant under the thighs, and another under the foot which holds the hands; then put the cautery on the wound all over your palm, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the wound does not leak when you do the cautery, so that you do not burn yourself or the patient dies, or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cautery for children should be subtle according to the size of their ears, and for large people it should be large according to their size; after three days cure the site of the cautery with butter until the scald is healed; then treat it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well closed; and their clothing should be loose enough that they do not chafe when they move around in their rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, if a well-made bandage is applied and worn for another 40 days, and he keeps good rest, eats and drinks little, and avoids excessive exertion; then when he follows these instructions, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say next about the treatment of cutting on his shoulder.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly:
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, do cautery with the cautery depending on its quantity, and burn the third of the skin; after the cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that it must be cauterized with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first sign the place of entry and make a line through the width above the ulcer, and another below, and hold your hand steady throughout the entire cautery process.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in a limb, whether from falling or injury, and the pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "point," and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its twisting and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed from the first cautery, that is good; if not, do another cautery on top of it, for usually it will move to the member nearest to it, so you should do cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of bleeding
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Sometimes diseases are cured by cautery with great difficulty, especially those that come from putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see it needs cauterization, take care whether the disease is in its beginning or not, and if it is cured according to what we have said before, without any ulceration or swelling, and you doubt that corruption might spread throughout the disease, then do five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and two at the front by the temples, and two behind on the nape of the neck; and hold your hand so that the cautery comes down to the bone, and vaporize the strong humors until they issue out; and cauterize the face according to what has been said.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the malady is scattered everywhere and is manifestly improving, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery in the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large cautery on the croup and another nearby, and two cauteries on each shoulder; and two cauteries on the elbows, and two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, and one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the calf so that you do not burn them; and sometimes make one cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do of cautery, the more you help it, and move it to profit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already all corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards cure the place with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not healed, then make cauteries on the member according to its size; let the cautery be a little hot into the thickness of the skin; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is done on the hand and foot and back, at the outlet of a nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus if the swelling is removed; and nevertheless no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the outlets of the nerves moving through the body.
de albaras	of poplars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" occurs, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery tool according to the thickness of the skin, until the white color is removed and the color changes; then treat it with a poultice of wheat flour and lentils, mixed with rose oil, plantain leaves, colon blood, and almond blood, each ingredient in equal parts. Mix everything together and apply it to the affected area, keeping it in place until the wound heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre first appears, and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is shaped like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And nevertheless the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the chancre; and nevertheless this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may be ulcerated and damaged, and I have indeed seen this happen sometimes; and a more certain thing is that it be cauterized around the edge, with the cautery called 'circle', as we have said about many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to die, either because of the excess fluid it produces or because of the age of the illness when it becomes decrepit (that is, very old), and there is little blood, or because of the time; and you see it hastening to die: therefore cauterize it all around with many small cauteries, piercing; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through to the cautery, then heat the cautery with which this is formed:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them driving out in such a way that the course of the pustules is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat it until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another type of disease which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a eating away of a limb, for it gnaws at the limbs just as fire burns dry wood.Et s’il corrodent les os, et li malaide est mortel; il doit estre treffuz par le meisme cauter, come susdis.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat the cautery-irons small and large, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is; after cauterizing it all over, so that you reach all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and put on the cauterized places a poultice with oil until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of ointments that cause wounds to heal.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that flesh does not grow, it is good; and if not, then recommence the cautery on what remains of the diseased places.Si li membres sont treschiers, si covient que l’on les depeile, et adés le cure avec oignemens qui ont vertus ad curant char; et si ceu non, si covient qu’il soit osté, s’il ne peut demorer, par cautere de feu ou d’aultre maniere.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this swelling has sometimes been cured by a medicine poultice instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless, fire cautery is of much greater help, and I have already described the cure for a poultice in the division: take it whenever you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that appear on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that through the feet there arises a disease which is called a 'clot' according to our understanding, and is a large hardened lump which blocks the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	Namely, fire cautery and hot water cautery.Et li fuels que on doit averir por ceste maladie, sont ainsis: pren sel, et vin, et oile, et poudres fin, et poivre, et gales, et terron de fer, et frens de cerf, et frens de renard, et frens de lonc best, et frens de lion, et frens de lonc pis, et frens de lonc peche, et frens d’ours, et frens de lonc chien, et frens de lonc chat; et prene tout ceste fuellie et mets a l’enverzun, et trais li pies et li solz, et li cotes de l’enverzun, et li costes de l’enverzun, et li tores de l’enverzun; et li cauteres que tu faras en li pies et en li solz et en li cotes et en li costes, et en li tores, doit averir selonc la guisance del pied qui est mal, si le pied est tort ou droit.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery, heat the cautery as hot as a feather of an owl, and made of good iron to the measure that it can touch the nail all around, and that it has thin edges; after, put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; leave it thus for three days until it begins to produce pus; then make a poultice of crushed mallows with salt, and leave the poultice all night, and the nail will fall off and be rooted out from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the place with ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by spreading throughout the body, and many times they occur in hands and feet, then you must administer hot-water cautery; and it is in such a way: take an iron or bronze rod, or an owl feather, and put it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, warts; and place the rod so that it presses all around, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, and can find the hot water a deep path right to the root; and let the patient endure the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you extract all those in the body; then treat the wounds that generate pus with ointments.
li cure dou trembler	the cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people tremble from the coldness of nerves, or from quartan fever or other, then you must make 4 cauteries or 4 on the spine, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with olive cautery; then it will leave the trembling, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes sores appear on the surface of the body, or pustules that emit a foul odor, which come from corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If necessary, when they first appear, one should make a cautery on the top of each pustule: with a thin cautery of myrtle wood, whose point is taken up in fire, or with a long root of aristologe, or with a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning as they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from that point forward, but the surplus matter from which they come is disrupted, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.Et aucune fois il covient que li cauteres soit fait a la fin quan le puss est venuz et ne puet croistre en avant: selonc cest maniere qu’un cuit oignon, ou raifne, ou vergeile, ou fust de sauge, ou racine d’aristologe longue, ou fust de mirte subtil, ou cautere lenticulaire; et les met a leu que li puss soit venuz.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from outside, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grieving thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to anyone, you should quickly put your index finger over the wound of the vein, and press it hard until the blood is stopped beneath your finger, and no drops come out; then heat the olive-oil cautery rods, both small and large, until they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and the location where the artery is running, and place the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger from the wound and the cautery goes out, quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and be careful that you don't hurt the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stopped by itself if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by a strong ligature, or by medicines put on that have the power to stop bleeding; and it should be bound and compressed skillfully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	He who attempts to stop the bleeding by tying it tightly with cloth or putting hot things on it, or similar things, will not help if he does not know how.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any medicine present, then they should put their index finger on the wound as we have said, and apply firm pressure until it is stopped up above the wound; and they should not move the finger but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood congeals, swells, and stops. And they should send someone to get what they need for cauteries and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization with fire or burning medicines, and the humors, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I will go through this chapter along the same path so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater caution is needed.Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such who are so affected by their illness that they will die easily due to the foolishness they display in their sickness, and because of the great severity of their illness, one must be cautious with them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who give you their sense and say, "Wait, I am healed"; and the illness is stubborn.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely what you are certain of and can be proven and from which you can gain profit; and use prognostication and indication in curing your illnesses for which salvation is sought. And that will help you attain a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear son, may Our Lord grant you wisdom and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have discussed from the head until the feet, so that you find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the umbilical cord is tightened too tightly around the child's neck; and sometimes it comes from a reason unknown to us.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those that I have seen, death has always been the outcome; and because of this, it seems better to me to leave the treatment as it is.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw .I child whose shoulder was filled with water, and the head swelled every day until it could no longer support it; and he believed so much in moisture that he died, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the diaphragm, between the heart and the bone; and the operations are such that when the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you split an opening in the head as wide as possible; and it should be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out; and see the shape of spatomile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is larger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the edges of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it has not closed up for you: then you must split an opening in the head according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all moisture fiercely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After the incisions, open the folds of skin and use powders, then apply wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then dislodge it, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head be extracted equally, and give the patient dry meat to eat, as much as the limb can bear, until the member is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at the size of the abscess and the gathering of the water; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut therefore where the abscess opens, and fill the gathering of water, and do it according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	from gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone to have a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and the medical cure does not help, then the last cure is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them covered, let the patient bend his head backward; then rub the area around a tough fold of skin until the arteries appear, then constrict the patient's neck with all his might while holding the skin taut; then examine where the vein drips, and the openings on either side are after the ears, and the pouches are pulled back; then sign the openings inside, then cover both with a pointed spatulum in two parts, as far as the jawbone, and it should be broad at the front of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, insert the spatulum under the artery and cover it from above, cutting as deep as two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is uncovered, let the blood flow upward continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three digits, then cut deeply and slice up to the bone; and what amount of blood is appropriate to pour out is six parts, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if nothing remains on the bone, no suppuration, then drain the wound and ligature it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	to migrate
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old inflammation comes, and a catarrh develops, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient forensics and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medicine but none of it helps him, then we should extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is that the patient should grow a beard on his temples, and feel for the artery which opens in the temple, as it opens noticeably by its beating, and is less reponsive to pressure in some people who are too cold; and if it is responsive, he should hold the artery with some cloth, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and moisten the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum of which there is a description below:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up with pincers, and separate it well from the tissues that are underneath in each part; and if the artery is тонкая, then return it to the tip of the fingernail, then ligature that part according to the quantity of two digits.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if she is not cut, her womb will not be clean all over.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out blood from the vein until it is 1/6th full, up to 1/3rd; and if the artery is large, then tie it with a strong double silk thread in two places so that pus does not enter before the wound heals, and let the blood flow out freely; then cut away the excess between the two ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron until the bone is exposed; and this is the primary treatment if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cautery aids in drying up moisture, therefore it is particularly helpful for wet sores.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And for the extraction of veins, one should fill the wound with old cotton and place it under well-made tents; and when they are removed, they should be treated with dry medicines that cause scabs to form, and with tents until they are healed; and if without cutting through the artery as much as you work on it, then hasten to cover it by cauterizing, or you can employ vitriolic ointment and press it in your hand so that the heat is drawn out of the vein; and if you do not have that present, then apply your finger to the site until the heat ceases, and moisten the site with cold water so that the heat stops, and press it as necessary; and what is better and lighter for the extraction of veins is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of 2 parts, but the cutting edge should be well-spaced to retain its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when an instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less well.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a thickness of one digit, and then when you have seared both sides and place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and open the vein in two places; and they should be spaced apart between the two shoulders because they are not welded together by this cautery all around; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	teardrops
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears fall from the eyes that are above the testicle on the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel in the forehead a pulsation like trembling; and if the eyes are sunken and moist so that the hair of the eyelids has fallen out, and the eyelids are burned and scalded by the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And the old ones called it "cure contused", and you should do to the patient who has this disease the hairs on his forehead, then make III incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as long as two beans all over the forehead from top to bottom, and the other two on either side above the eyebrows, and beware of cutting the arteries that are on either side above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and each wound should be the size of three beans across the joint; and have a piece of sponge and a lot of cloth ready to soak up the blood, then put the spatumile in at both ends where the shape is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision at the temple all the way to the second incision; then scrape all around the skull between the two cuts up to the skin on top of the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second cut, and then remove this spathumile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put into the first cut the instrument called "culter," which is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other, it is this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And cut along the coast towards the chest to the heart, and the under coast towards the bone, and slice it until it reaches the middle slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And tie all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to what opens from the heart, and then make another cut in the middle slit to the other defiant; then draw out blood equally, and express the place for the taken blood; then put a tent made of old cotton into each slit, and place wet clothes soaked in wine and oil and garlic on top, and be careful that no abscesses come to it; then on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer a lot of water with a sponge, then treat it with basilicon ointment with rosemary oil, and other remedies for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eye
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has a persistent cough and you see the eyes turn yellow and small, and the vision weakens, and the eyelids burned, and the hair falls out, and in the head there is pain, and the sick person sneezes; then know from these symptoms that these materials and this phlegm come from many veins, and the cure for it is as follows:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should command the patient to lean back his head, then make a large slit in the forehead, and another one from the wide eye socket.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start the incision from the left temple to the right temple, and cut down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerve in the temples that controls swallowing; and when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then pack between the two lips of the slit cotton wool, and tent with linen; then apply dampened cloths with wine and oil, and be careful to avoid hot abscesses; once it is healed, you should rub the bone until new growth begins, then treat with healing remedies that promote growth.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colocinth, and make an ointment; and administer it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	the cleaning of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains or insects, or stones, or similar objects like iron; or seeds such as beans, peas; or flowing substances like water and garlic and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear, whether a stone or something else that does not adhere to the ear nor grow in it, then hold the ear towards the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distill a little violet oil or oil of sesame, then administer extraction; and make him sneeze by means of incense, and plug his nostrils when sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and let the ear be raised upward.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often it comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer extraction with subtle pincers, of which there is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it pops out with the pincers, that's good; if not, then extract it with a fine needle of soft wire; and if it does not come out in this way, make a small brass hook and insert its tip into the ear canal firmly, and plug the area around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out firmly, for very often it will come out as we have said. And if it still does not come out in this way, take some glue, and attach a small instrument suitable for this purpose to it, and place some cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out with all the things we have mentioned, then be quick to split the ear so that pus and blood come out, and a spasmodic apoplexy; and the manner of splitting is that you first make the patient fast from the head, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends; and the split should be like a crescent moon, so that you come to the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it strongly with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is there and it swells, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer .i. spatula gently and subtly according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do it when you think that the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with subtle pincers and a sucking instrument, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water that falls into the ear, therefore, the patient should use sneezing incense first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	Let him lie on the same side as the ear with the infection.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out by itself, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if not, take many thin stones according to the size of your finger and heat them gently in fire. Then put one end of a stone into the ear, and press on it from outside with another stone; and if a pus-filled blister forms at one end, pierce it with a needle and squeeze out the pus; then take another hot stone and hold it against the wound until all the pus has drained out, and thus will the blister pop completely. If you see a pimple forming, take a sharp straw or needle and pierce it; then squeeze out the pus from inside until it's completely drained, as we have described for the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of insects, if it is a small body, like lice and similar things, then treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large body that can be felt, then administer an extraction with tweezers; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight; if there are any worms, treat them with fine pincers, and if none appear, take the candle from which the form [of the worm] comes.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is tight below and loose above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Then push the narrowest end of the tube into the ear according to the amount of the pain from the ailment, then suck strongly on the tube; do this repeatedly until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, then stop the tube with cotton as I said for the stone; and if they still do not come out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have tried for worm extraction, and you will find them in the section on distillations; and then distil your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or brass with a narrow end and a wide top for distillation; and to press the distillate within an instrument of well-made brass for this purpose, and if you see take a rasor and wrap cotton around its tip skillfully; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want from your medicines into the candle, and let the candle be in the ear; then insert the rasor with all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled onto the surface of the ear; and he feels the malady within, and let the distillation be a little warm as it is distilled into the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not then be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	the cleaning of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ear; and the same thing happens to adults due to an abscess or pus forming within the ear, and sometimes this abscess erupts inside the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there is only a small defect in the hole, which can be seen easily.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when the abscess erupts and cannot be seen, it is a sign of poor healing in various conditions, and in such cases, one should hold the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane appearing, then it indicates that the healing is progressing well.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be thin and smooth in front and behind, without causing pain to the ear; if the membrane is due to pus or body tissue within the ear, then hold it with delicate tweezers and gently scrape it away until all the pus is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the growth is deep in the ear, then take a thin sharp razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the piercing pain that the sick person feels upon hearing, pierce gently and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert a tent into the ear according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on top of it; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is appropriate to pull out the tent and insert another tent moistened with cerotum made from olive oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, plunge a sponge and cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding that are used for treating distempers.
de la char des papieres	of the char of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This remedy comes from plants that grow on their own when they are moist and dry up; you must then extend them with tweezers and pincers, and cut off the top of a spathe at its roots; then place ground vitriol over the site.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if you remove their bark, then cauterize them with a delicate lens-shaped cautery tool, and the cautery after the incision is good for scabs; and many times they return, as long as something remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times they come in papers, some things that look like gravel in their shape and hardness, and because of this, the disease is called "hail", and it is a collection of thick moisture on top and bottom; the work is such: take care if the hail is silent on one side and another, and it is an easy thing to know; then they do it from the large one, then peel each part gently, then pick it up with tweezers and scoop it out.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot scoop it without piercing the paper a little, do not harm the patient; and if the split is large, sew it up and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, do not use force, because ointments will restore it immediately and heal it.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the stone is descending within the ear towards the upper part, then reverse the paper, and hold the stone with tweezers, and press from both sides; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does no harm; and when the stone is crushed, wash out the eye with salty water, and cure the place of that which causes infection until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is interlaced in the papers above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and it is very painful to them; and they get catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears run down to their eyes. And because of this, they lie down on their faces, and sleep on top of them, and their papers are under their eyelids, moistened by the inflammation and appearance that have covered the eye with exinach which opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the area with your fingers and feel the exinach coming out between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of treatment is that the patient places his head on the lap of the здорового; and then take .i. linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinah from each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers on both sides, so that the exinah is collected within the circle. Then, with a spatula cut an opening in the middle of the moistened skin, not any larger than the wound made for venesection; and in some cases, exinah comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take then a piece of cloth and hold it between your fingers to the side, and move your hand from right to left until it is spread out; and be careful not to push into the opening so that you do not reach all the way to the eye and hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the opening does not open at the beginning of the slit, then widen the slit slightly so that it appears; then pull as we have said, then moisten cloth in vinegar and water, and place on the site, and hold with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the eye until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is a hot abscess in that area, treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.Et si il est venin de saige, il faut le cureer.
des poilz des papieres	And if the patient does not move, then put salt and sand on the site, and treat it until it heals, and make a soothing poultice on the stone and place it there; then he will be without pain, God willing.of paper fibers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from papers out of their natural place and are ingrown, they harm themselves and cause various diseases such as tears, softening of the papers, and albugine, which leads to the destruction of the hairs; there are four ways to treat this: by cautery with fire, by medicine water according to what is described before the chapter on cautery, and by incision and stitching or splints, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in your lap, then hold the paper of the eye in your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, then insert a needle with thread through it; and this should be done at the edge of the paper where the hairs are growing out of place, and draw the thread over the entire paper, and return it to the razor; then, in the part under the paper, under the ingrown hairs, cut from the great tear duct to the small one, and extract the thread, and place a small tent made of cotton and linen underneath the paper, and sign a cross on the paper, like a myrrh ball, and still, the sign should be according to the amount you see the divided paper rising.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if one has plenty of paper according to how soft the paper is; then make a spatumile all along the two lines that you have signed, and start from the large nostril up to the small; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a hair root, then put the awl into one of the two angles of the heart, then scrape it all; then sew the two lips together with a thread of fine wool through an needle, and draw out the blood, and dry up the superfluity of the threads on the two nostrils with anything sticky if you see fit to do so; and if not, don't worry about it, then leave the sewing and the threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without sewing it with dry and constricting things, for the paper revives at the souding of the wound and its joining, but the sewing is painful (as the ancients say), and this work is done without fear; and there is another way: and that is to mark the paper in a shape like the leaf of a myrtle, as we have described, with three points spread out according to the form which is shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what is above with small scissors evenly according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the object is not equal, then take a needle where there is a thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put another thread next to the large eyelid, and the second thread next to the small one, and bring the threads together equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above which you have marked, as we have described, then bring the two lips of the wound together by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerot and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes the hairs on the paper are converted: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the cane is as follows: you should turn the paper and put it inside according to what I have said, then make .ij. canes by art, and .ij. subtle bonds as long as the paper and the width of the spatumile; and attach .ij. heads from .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what is on top of the paper of the eye, and strain the .ij. canes from the .ij. formed parts; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that was strained will die and shrivel up and peel off as it falls away from itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed and the wound has force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn up and the paper is lifted, the hairs will not grow anymore; and this is the form of the two cannas that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the works are such that you pierce a fine needle, and thread it with a soft and subtle silk thread; then assemble the heads and knot them subtly, and the length of the threads should be a palm long; then arrange in the case another fine silk thread, and knot the head of the thread; then place the patient's head in your hand; and have this in the sun so that the works are declared, for these are subtle and fine works, then thread the needle all the way into the paper until it reaches the hair root, and draw it up through the paper until it is completely drawn out; then draw your hand away so that the hairs come out straight with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you will treat the wound underneath to the full extent that you have ordered, until the wound comes out from the opening above and you see it with your eye; then you will treat the wound and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany one long hair of the natural hairs, and let it grow with that one which you left, until it lengthens, then you will pull it out.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the pustule of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or warts comes in the eye, there are two ways it can happen: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to treat it is to split the wart, and separate its lips, and place inside tents of linen, and leave it until it heals; and you must not use in its treatment anything that dries and constricts.Et si tu ne puis desanier li, si covient que tu le fendes et laves en l’eau chaude, et metes dedens tenture de lin, et laves le de nouveau, et tant fais jusques qu’il soit sanee.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And if you cannot heal it, then you should split and wash it in warm water, and place a linen tent over it, and wash it again, and do this until it is healed.For if you use dry things, the disease will return worse than before; but use softening things like fenugreek, and rosewater or altée and flaxseed cooked in oil, and apply an ointment of roasted linseed, and wrap it up in a tent, and treat it thus.Et si le maladie vient en la paupiere, si covient que tu metes dedins une tente de lin, et tu la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; mais ne fas pas en li tenture de lin qui soit cuit en aigue chaude, car il adoublet li maladie.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you must be careful that it does not heal according to the shape it was before; and these works that we have said are not remedies for this disease, but treatments so that it does not return to the shape it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is underneath, which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds and incisions and cauterizations and similar things; and the way to treat them is that you take a needle with a double thread, and pierce it into the flesh, and make it pass through from the left armpit so that the thread comes out in two places on the chest; then the flesh above is sutured all around the needle, and the knot is tied at the broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the wound returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the incision, and turn the flesh, and make two incisions along the sides inside the flesh; and the ends of the two incisions should be at the two angles of the incision you have sewed up, so that when they are brought together, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has the name  "I Greek"; then remove this flesh, according to the quantity that its sides are torn beneath it, from what follows the flesh, then join the two torn parts and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said with softening medicines and poultices, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the malady comes from a split or sewing or cautery, then you must make a plain split under the hair of the scalp, and according to what is mentioned above; then unscrew between the two lips of the tent, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares devices with all his power so that he causes the figure to return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what they require of operation and instruments in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the scalp
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suddenness happens to humans in such a way that the scalp is separated from the white of the eye, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must stick the tip of a razor under the scalp and lift it upward; and use tweezers, so that you grasp what is cut by the spatula, which is neither too blunt nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot bear to have the eye too deeply cut; and make your incision, by which you peel off this union, gently, so that the scalp returns according to its natural form; and all of this union is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is a saline discharge, and it is relieved with warm water and a bandage; then place between the scalp and the eye a tent made of linen, and place over the eye a damp piece of wool; and after three days, use the ointment and the soothing remedies until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You should know that the nail has two forms: one is nerveous and resembles a tough membrane; the other is not nerveous but resembles congealed white moisture, such that when you touch it with iron and try to cut it with pincers, nothing happens. Both types originate from the inner corner of the eye, and grow little by little until they cover the entire sight and light, and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of the incision is that the patient should turn his head towards you, then open their eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grab the nail with pincers of small pliers, and stab it at the top; then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox's hair, and a strong thread; and double over the tip of the needle a little and push it into the nail, and tie the nail to the thread and stab it at the top, and scrape along the side of the nail that follows the eyelid and the eye until the end of the lash, then cut the rest in the root of the tear duct with great care and small forces, leaving the natural membrane of the tear duct untouched; and sometimes only stab the nail at the edge of the eyelid, and the thread, as we have said. Then scrape it along the entire tear sac carefully:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the tear sac does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the eyelid is not pierced; after the incision, apply a little powdered quicklime to the eye, and make a collar out of it, and leave it on until the next day; then clean the eye as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not sensitive, and you cannot push in the needle, and the hook does not fit inside it, many times this kind of nail is cured with medicine; they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see that it covers up, then treat the eye of the patient, and take a light spatula according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail gently, and if you see that it does not shrink and the pus is still coming out, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper and sea salt ground up, and swab the eye until the next day; then start the other treatment again according to this same method, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then start the treatment again as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid is harmful to the eye in a great way, then suspend it on the hook, and cut off a part but not all of it so that the body of tears does not come; then distill into the eye a red collar made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the eye which grows above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men, a red lump sometimes appears on the eyelid, covering the pupil and pressing against the eyelids, resembling a rose on a baluster; the patient then puts their head down, and they work on the eye, and they push all this flesh towards the nails, suitable for this purpose, and hold it there with force; then they cut through the first lump of flesh, and continue cutting all the way to the eyeball, taking care not to blink during the operation; and the incision should be made as described in the section on nail incisions, using gentle pressure to remove the membrane, as demonstrated in this chapter; once the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, apply a mixture of crushed vitriol or similar corrosive medicines to the eye, and place cotton soaked in egg white over it to protect against hot abscesses; if anything remains, and the white turns red, indicating a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with cooling remedies; then return to the operation once the eye has healed, and repeat this process for each lump of flesh that appears in the eye.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you must use caution when treating weak eyes with the natural method or accidentally with iron; and do not force your hand in any of these treatments until you see that the patient is suffering from this procedure.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Red veins cover the eyes, hindering vision and weakening the eyes every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, first examine the eyes to see if there is any other disease besides the red veins; then treat them in this way: instruct the patient to lean his head back, then squeeze those veins gently all around according to your wisdom, and make the incisions on the eyelids subtle and double according to this shape.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And two incisions in .i. body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then squeeze those veins gently, and let the blood out an hour after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to damage the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not touch anything but the veins; and when you have done that, then distill into the eye green and red koliri to corrupt what is left of the stye.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot pull out all of this in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye from things that soothe the pain of them, and let it be for several days until the pain is eased and the hot abscess is assured, then start again according to this way which is before, until he is healed; and this is the form of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Examine the fistula closely: when you heal it with cautery and medicine that burns according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then dig into the abscess where it should be, and draw out all the moisture from it, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see the corruption and blackness, then it returns to all its instruments from which this form comes; and it is called a "harsh head", and should be made into a .i. sharp point, and punctured like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you know that the corruption is gone; and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the vein is glued and the body of the bow is glued and remains that way for 40 days without becoming inflamed and nothing bad happens, then you know it is healed; if not, there is only one other thing to do, which is to open the fistula at the opening of the nostril according to this shape: and you must uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take out the forest according to this shape, and the head of the tool should have three angles, and the shaft should be tapered to a point as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then places it on the bone of the eye socket, and moves his hand away from the eye a little, then returns to the entire socket until he pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the vent in his finger if he holds his hand over his nose; then restore the area with dry medicine as I have taught you, and when the flesh heals and hardens, test the matter on the nose; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the eye's output
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open and there is no disturbance to the brain or eye damage, you should bind the patient; then cleanse the eye, then apply leeches or suck out the fluid without piercing, then place on the eye a poultice made of acacia gum, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla; then tightly bind the eye with bandages and cloth, the cloth being folded in half four times to create several layers, and then placed one on top of the other according to how much the eye needs; then tightly bind it from above with a firm bandage, and repeat the leeches to suck out the fluid without piercing; then remove the leeches and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the poultice softens, you should tightly bind it again; then remove the poultice after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, repeat the poultice and bandages until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the rupture of a woven veil
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a tear occurs in woven fabric, it opens and appears like a grain of resin, and is terrifying to look at. Therefore, if you see it breaking, the work is such that you should pierce the fabric with a needle at the root of the tear from the lower part up to the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread in the edge of the tear; and pierce the fabric, and leave the first needle according to its position. Then, tie the double thread around the tear and tightly bind it, then remove the needle and place a soft pad moistened with egg white over the eye, and leave it until the threads cut through the veil, then cleanse the eye with comforting substances until it is healed. Sometimes, the tear is constrained by a circle of cloth on each side until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a spatumile needle which comes from the bottom of the eye, and remove the white moist film and bring down the eyes, and enter immediately thereafter; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati", is nothing but a swelling gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the treatment is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and upright seat, then take his head between your hands and move it until you see the swelling come to your eyes; then it should be pinched, and the light should be blocked, and the patient should see things as he used to; and if it does not go down below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the swelling is not apparent as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula and cut through the corneum to the conjunctiva, and as far as the bowels; and when it is issued, let hot water infused with honey, or water in which fenugreek and honey have been boiled, be distilled into the eye, and then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have described the appearances of diseases in the division, and what should be done to pierce them; now act according to the instructions given.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and close and squeeze his healthy eye tightly; then place the paper over his affected eye, with the right side of the paper over a right eye, or the left side over a left eye; then take in your right hand, if it is a right eye, the instrument called «almagda», or in your left hand if it is a left eye; then put the tip of the instrument next to the cornea through the white part of the eye at the edge of the lower eyelid, and push the instrument called «almagda» skillfully, and twist your hand until it pierces the white part of the eye, and feel that «almagda» comes into contact with the empty space; and the depth of the «almagda» should be equal to the thickness of a plum from the edge of the black part to the end of the white part; this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the bone through the paper because of the clarity of the cornea, and then push the instrument until it reaches the aqueous humor, then express it beneath one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water is flowing now, then the patient will see the instrument in front of him and the doctor's hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest for a little while, and if the water flows back the second way, push it out with the instrument, and when it is stuck in and not flowing up, gently twist your hand a bit; then put some more gem-water into the eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then insert the eye with cotton wool or lamb's wool soaked in rose oil and in plenty of egg white, and bind it up with clean cloth.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put on crushed comfrey with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if  'almagda' cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  'alberit', of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so, therefore, cut only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make the cut fine, then pour in the gem-water as we have said; and when the operation is complete, prepare for the patient a dark room to sleep in on his back in a dim place; and he must abstain from all movement, and eat light food, and not move his head or to the right or left, and he must be bound according to his condition for three days; then loosen him in that same dark room, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the incision or now, but you must ease it so that the water flows gently.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If such an abscess comes, you must release the eye before the seventh day, and apply that which soothes abscesses; and when it is pacified, then release the eyelid and place over his face a gold rim to cover any eye, and let him be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then exit the house a little at a time, and return to his case; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Spain who told us that in his country they make a slit in the almighty, and suck out the water, but I have never seen this done in our land, nor have I ever read of it in ancient books; and perhaps this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of almandine, so that those who do not know them can see them; and they are properly made of bronze:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the tops of the horns should be of the same subtlety, and the tips in three angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart through the chest
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes strange horses are born with various defects, some of which look like scorpions with many feet; and there are some with a hoofed leg of a good color, and there is a hoofed leg of a good color.Et il y a certaines qui sont nées avec une seule corne, et d'autres avec des cornes à l'arrière, et certaines avec des cornes comme des chèvres, et d'autres avec des cornes comme des béliers, et certaines avec des cornes comme des vaches, et d'autres avec des cornes comme des buffles, et certaines avec des cornes comme des licornes.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case, with these carts which are soft and not encrusted, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, pour wine on the carts, and pull them out; then hold what you can with a thin spatulate instrument from one side, until you know that the cart is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If any of the matter remains that we cannot cover, then open it up with one of the subtle instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if without it overwhelming you, or causing an abscess, then cut it out as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten to cauterize them until the blood is stanched and all the pus is removed, then pour on new wine and water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the ears open and moisture comes to the palate, you know that he is cured; and if moisture does not pass through as it should, you know that there is a cart in the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach to cut out: therefore you must insert a thick thread of linen there, which has been soaked in water, and let it hang down by itself, with one end or the other sticking out; put the end of the thread into the patient's nostril as far as he can bear it, until you feel that the cart is entirely removed.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this as long as you know that the nails have corrupted the flesh, then pull out the nail, wash the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the ear as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is left of the flesh; and then put in the ear a plug of plaster for some days until it is healed, and if it needs dry medicines, then use them; and this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, with which one distills oils and medicines into the ears.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	It should be made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the conduit as well; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be hollow for purging the nose; and it should have a handle at the end to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart through the chest
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the chest, and grows and becomes large, until it is visible to the eye; and for this reason you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place the cautery or burning medicine on it; and if one delays cutting it until it has become large, then be wary whether it is hard, of a dark color, and lacking in feeling: do not touch it with iron, for this is an abscess, for when it is cut at any time, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due only to pressure, not from a dark color, and you see that one can completely cover it, then empty the wound and cut it without fear, and cure the place of dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the chest has been cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilages, it benefits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, whenever this happens to anyone, look to see if the wound is fresh and bleeding; then bring together the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and treat it until it heals; and if the lips are torn on both sides, then you must scrape away all the dead flesh from around the wound, then bring together the two lips with a stitch and hold them, and powder dragon's blood and incense together over them; and put a piece of strong plaster or other healing plaster over the powders, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have made you understand.
des apostemes des levres	from abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, there are hard abscesses on the lips, similar to grains of wheat, both smaller and larger; therefore, you should turn over the lip, and cut above each pustule, and squeeze it with tweezers, and then apply vitriolated powder to the incision until the blood is staunched. Then use garlic and treat the area with dry substances until it heals.
de la char des gencives	from gum swelling
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth appears on the gums, which the elders call "albus". You should hold it with tongs and cut at its root, letting the blood or pus flow out; then place ground vitriol or other restraining and drying powders over the site. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; it will not return after cautery. These are the forms for treating growths.
des sordens	from disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the base of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, and there are ugly and rough growths; sometimes teeth are black, green, or yellow, so that corruption has reached the gums, and they stink; so you should have the patient hold his head in your hands and open his mouth wide, and examine the teeth where the growths appear, removing everything completely. And thus you will do with the blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other discolourations, cleaning them all up. If you remove what is there at first, that is good; if not, then do it again the next day and the day after, until you have removed everything. Know that teeth require diverse forms of instruments for scraping, depending on what the work shows you, so that the tools used to scrape between teeth are different from those used to scrape the gums. And these forms and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat a tooth for its pain, you should delay drawing it as long as possible, because one must not do that; for that is a very high substance up to the point that one has no excuse to pull it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the patient is compelled to draw breath, you must be certain about the toothache.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and believes it to be in a sound tooth, and has the healthy tooth pulled; and nevertheless the pain does not go away because of this, until the evil tooth is extracted, for we have often tried this with these doctors; and when you are quite certain about the toothache, you must scrape around the tooth all around, spitting strongly to push back the gum from all sides; then he moves it with his fingers or with fine tweezers, little by little, until it is well loosened, then he applies the tweezers firmly; and let the patient's head be between your knees, and hold it fast so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	Afterwards, extract the tooth firmly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, you should fill the hole with linen, and gently constrict it with forceps so that it does not break while being extracted; and one must work carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, leaving a part behind, which will cause greater pain due to the root's maliciousness.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware of doing as ignorant surgeons do, who in their haste and arrogance sometimes break a tooth, not heeding what we have instructed; they sometimes bring about great illness due to the roots remaining, or by breaking the tooth, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often does, apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, which are mute to the teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not break when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of thick material so that they do not bend when pulling, and should be well-made iron, and should be toothed to hold the mucous.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in the tract, you must place moistened cotton on it for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the skin softens, then use the forceps called 'algefri', which resemble a pair of tongs; inside they are serrated like a file and this is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with these tweezers, then you should uncover the skin all around the root, and insert the instrument called "althali", which is a spatula, whose shape is like this:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be firm and wide so that it does not break, and if the root comes out with this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, whose forms come after this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one should use this instrument which has two ends, whose shape is like this:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools which are in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, whose shape is like this:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And have this instrument ready so that it cannot break, and know that there are many instruments for teeth; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise master finds his own instrument through his own skills, according to what his work and the disease show him, because there are many diseases for which the ancients did not teach an instrument due to their diversity. And if it does not break in the cart or other bones, but protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, as I have told you, and helps with gestures; this is how it is done:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-fitting so as to hold the bone, so that it does not slip but can be held and removed; and then restore the site with appropriate medicines. And if there is protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then treat it with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to nature and its shape is ugly, especially in young women, you should know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down; then pull it out. And if there is an air pocket with the tooth, take this instrument, of which there is a drawing, and it should resemble a small beak, and be made of tempered iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And push it gently into the gums for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a type of file as shown in the drawing:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the file with which we make needles; and file the tooth a little bit each day gently, so that it does not move until it is straight; then smooth it at the end completely with any file, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down the roughness so that it is even and doesn't cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth is loose due to an injury or decay, and the patient cannot bite down on anything without pain, and you have treated them with constricting medicines without success, then they must be bound with a gold wire, as silver wire turns green and rusts, but gold never changes; the wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the size of the gap between the teeth. If you want to pull out the tooth, take the wire and wrap it around both healthy teeth, then place the loose tooth between the molars, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then repeat the binding process from the starting point, pulling your hand gently and firmly so that it does not move. The wire should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then clip the teeth with tweezers, and bring them together, and fit them between the healthy teeth, and put it in so that it does not bite the tongue; and then leave it tightly for as long as it can stay, and if it slips, or the wires break, then tighten it with another wire; let it remain and serve thus all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of the healthy II teeth, and the II bad ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, if it is replaced in its place, fresh after fresh, as we have said; and only a wise and experienced person should attempt this. Sometimes, the shape of a tooth is made from cow bone, and placed where the deficiency is, then restrained as we have described, and remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the vein of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes the tongue is tied under the tongue by nature, which one is born with; or by accident from a wound; and the treatment is that you open the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your healthy mouth, and loosen the tongue; then grab the nervous ligament widely so that the tongue is loosened from its socket, and if there is hardness or a nodule, and this is due to a wound, then he inserts the hook and grabs the ligament widely; and be careful that the split is not too deep for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift the place with rose water and garlic, or cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and dye the patient's tongue every night so that it does not stick.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, place powdered vitriol over the site; and if the blood stops, cauterize with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this. Then treat it further until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it discolored black or hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it because it is a ulcer; and if it is declining into a blister and there is moisture, cut into it with a spatulum, and free it from both sides; and if the bleeding starts at your action, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your action until you draw out everything; then raise the area with vinegar and salt, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there are sores in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "almonds". When treating them as we have described in the division, if they are not healed, take care: if there are hard sores of small size and a pale color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent bleeding; but leave it until it is mature, and then you will burst it, or it will break on its own. And if it is of a pale color and the root is thin, have the instrument ready to cover it, but first check that the sore is calm and soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore let the patient sit facing the sun, and his head should be in your shade, and he should open his mouth and the servant should hold the implement between his hands, and press the tongue underneath at its tip, where the shape is; it should be made of silver or thin brass, just like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Then you press the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the hook and insert it into the almond, and pull it out from above as much as you can; and draw some threads of the fabric along with it, then cover the instrument with which comes the form, resembling a needle; and even so the points are bent, one to the left and the other to the right, and they are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover it with tweezers, from which comes the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And it is sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, then cut the other according to the same method, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and with vinegar and garlic, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water, or with pomegranate peels that have been cooked, or with bay leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so cut them thus as you cut the two tonsils.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and she had a very closed throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and she could not eat or drink, and would have died if it continued like this for one or two more days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had become so swollen that it had forced its way out through both nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened therefore, and inserted a hook into one of the nostrils, then drew it out, and took out a large amount of pus; then I did the same in the other nostril, and opened up her mouth and pressed down on her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the hook into the abscess, and scooped out some of its contents, and only a little blood came out; thus the passageway in the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to lance this abscess for a long time; and it would shrink again and fill up the space that I had emptied, so that it became very large; therefore, I packed it with a poultice and cauterized it inside her throat; thus it did not grow any more; and I left those parts, and God alone knew what happened to her after me.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the eye descends to the socket, and it is swollen and long, it is called 'perpendicular'; and if it is thick and round below, it is called an 'eye'.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it has been drained as we have said in the division, and the drainage does not help, and you see that the abscess is calmed down, and it is thin, then you should cover it; and the one which is round and not long, and it is blood-red or of a dusky color, then you should avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it according to the manner which I have described, with its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument of which we spoke earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out, and cover it with one of the two instruments which I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut away more than the excess that is beyond the natural boundary; for if you cut away more, it damages the voice and speech. And after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two testicles, and treat it until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears the cutting, then you should use the cautery of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is for acute disease.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put his head against your sound shoulder, and then press his tongue against the instrument that we have described in the chapter on cautery, and heat it with live fire, so that it is not too thick nor too thin; and use the implement of which this is the shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and has a hair or thread to hold the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and puts the instrument into all the medicine on the iris; and the patient lies on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth due to the medicine inside, so that it does not go down into the throat and lungs. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the iris for the duration of half an hour, until you see it hardening and the bites of the medicine calming down. If you see anything, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton all around the eye, so that the cotton adheres to the iris; do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. If you need to renew the cautery with more medicine, do so, and after the cautery, wash the area around the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is treated with fumigation in this way, take calaminus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and assemble all of them or some of them in one pot, and add vinegar, and let it boil. The pot should be well-glazed with strong earth, and the instrument inside should be cheved according to this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, and one end should be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eyeball is mortified; then he should do this often, until the eyeball dries out, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things can happen there; nor do this beyond the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a wooden stick and place an egg white on the tip, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg white will not allow the vapors to burden the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times there is stuck in the throat a bone or spine of a fish, or some other object; therefore you must pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you move the object; and if it does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie a string to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will stick, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and let the end be lifted upwards; and beware of touching the epiglottis, lest he choke, nor push the bone inside; and move as long as the patient has to vomit, so that the object is dislodged; then he swallows it, or pulls it out with the whole instrument equally, until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the bloodletting, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it out a little bit at a time with a small hook or subtle tweezers suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a carved wooden stick and insert it into the throat of the patient, then place the heated end of the stick in the groove of the stick, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has a fever all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Take a full glass of cold water and open the mouth, pour it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; as soon as the blood feels the water, it will stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not stop as we have said, then smoke out the patient with assafetida, using the instrument I described for smoking out the eye; do this many times, for it will stop without bleeding.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way to do the smoking is to put burning charcoal in a pot and cover it with a perforated lid, and place the instrument's tip in the hole; then pour in your smoke, and the patient should hold their breath with their head inside their mouth, closing their mouth so that no smoke escapes but goes directly to the blood; and the blood will stop now, and if it does not, repeat the smoking many times; and let the patient endure thirst, eating only salted and dry things, and drink nothing; and then they will surely pass away due to this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And if he needs to drink before the blood stops flowing, then let him drink warm wine or grape juice; for the blood will want to go to the stomach and be relaxed, and once it is there, the wine will take hold of it and draw it out.
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses, depending on what the memory of one and another comes after in this book, and they differ in penetration and size; and there are two ways, one is in its appearance itself, and from what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is due to the places where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses in the head are different from those in the bottom, and the abscesses in the fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in practice.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the boil is mature according to its fulfillment; and there are some that one must pierce when they become crushed, and they do not die according to their fulfillment, as with abscesses that are near joints. Car li bowe qui sont delez jointures ne doit mie estre percie tant que il ne soit meure, car li maux se part en la percier, et li maux qui il a avant la percier est grant; si com li apostemes qui vient sus la cheville qui leu tient la cheville.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from these joints and are left until they are rotten all around, the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, causing contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is near the principal limb and you delay piercing it until it is rotten, it will harm the principal limb. If it is near the anus, one should pierce it so that it may rot inside and be prolonged within, and a fistula may result; it may not heal for a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And one should know the time of piercing the abscess that is mature according to its development, and that is when the pain subsides, and the decline of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and from the discharge and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and one should make the piercing where the abscess is most dependent, and where it appears there is pus. And the piercing should be made from the long side of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints affecting nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who bend, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to let the piercing be until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that, the body where the venom comes from will be prolonged, and it is full of much filth; and perhaps the lips and the depths of it will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is an abscess that has been pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you should treat small abscesses with small incisions; and large abscesses with large incisions, and many slits according to the appearance of their size; and in such abscesses where one must cut into the skin, and cover; when they have become as hard as a grape, and are deadened, one should do as one does with blisters: and there are some that are split into three angles, and some which one covers like the fruit of the myrtle, like abscesses in the intestines; and there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar covering.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, such as a superficial abscess, you must pierce it plainly; and when the abscess is large and has drawn a great boil, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the boil at once, but only a part; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again; do this several times from time to time, until the boil is completely drained; likewise if the patient is of feeble strength, or a woman carrying child, or a small child, or an old decrepit man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the pus sometimes leaps out with the opening of the boil, and the patient might die from it without you realizing.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, handle this chapter with great caution; and when you have pierced the abscess, wash the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, apply tenters made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, you should put a tenter in each one so that they touch; and if you have cut into the abscess at its edge, and spread it open, then you should fill it with old cotton or the shavings of linen without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs from your work, then apply cold water and ease it, and wet the cloth, and place it over the bleeding spot many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding continues, then apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have described with my own hands in this book; and if it is in the winter, and the area around the abscess is very nervous, then you should place wet tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil over it; and if it is in the summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should place wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or cool wine and oil, for a third of the day, as we have said; then open the abscess and wash and treat it, as it should be, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And so it is necessary to know generally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the head come small abscesses, and they are of our nature, like the pustules on a newborn infant's skin, and there are many similarities among them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are greasy and others where there is moisture like pus; and there are also hard and stony ones, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act against them.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the stomach is such that you must test with every instrument called a "trocar", from which the forms come later, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they will release it from above through the long tube.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is released, they scrape it without leaving any of the skin that contains the moisture, for it returns later if nothing is left behind; then plunge cotton into Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain overnight will be cured.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin the cotton again, as before, on the second and third day, until you know well that it does not stay at night; then cure the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess contains pus, then open it according to this form, from above; and pour out your fingers, and scrape off all of it, and put all of your treatment into drawing out the pus under the skin; and if the artery makes a sound contrary to you, then do what I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do for the abscess if it is deep, and cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cut on the deep abscess and the moist one is lighter, because they are full of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses or bumps have no moisture, and some were the abscesses that I described in a chief of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if anyone had cut them they would have made just as much of a wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head, apart from those that come to the heads of children and the roots of the ears, the opening should be at the lowest most dependent location in order for pus to drain; and the treatment should be as it should be.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times abscesses occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere in the body, and they are large and intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own region, just as the scrofula and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similar scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malignant and do not want to heal.Et li scrophules sont maintes foiz en l’enditure des ossels, et en la cote dou col, et en la nuque, et en les asseles, et en la teste, et sous la racine des oreilles; et si contienent moistor et sang, et sont mout dolerues.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Therefore, when you see one that is well-disposed for cauterization and resembles the color of the body, and is mute in every part and not discolored by the nerves of the neck or the artery or the duct, and is not deep; then you should cover it from above and scrape each part, and if necessary, cut the two lips of the heart with an incision, as we have said for head abscesses. Then draw it little by little, making sure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and avoid burning or trenchant so that the hand does not slip, and do not go too far forward, so that you do not cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cover the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, then put into the wound vitriol ground, or some powders that stop bleeding, and constrict the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to fester.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is healed, return to your work until you finish it; then examine with your finger if there are any small sores remaining, and scrape and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	If there is a large vein at the root of the sore, you should not scrape that sore at its root but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall without causing harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment and heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you scrape the entire sore, you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now so that there is no superfluity remaining due to the size of the sore.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you should proceed to scrape its root and pull it out, then sew it as we have said.Quant la plaie est curiee, si covient que tu l’empraies de baume armoy, et li li gisunt par dessus, et le guarisist si com nos avons dit.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Scrofula that holds surplus pus, pierce there where it oozes; and pierce as above, depending on it, then administer poultices with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is left of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, then treat with an ointment poultice until it heals.
de squinance	of squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squint, the slit in the throat called the 'epiglottis' should be cut; and one must not make an incision by this, because all the veins and the lung of the sick person are at those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the lungs, one must cover the epiglottis to prevent loss due to strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it under three circles or four, a small split across, between the two circles, or by the amount of the split in the soft palate; and those places that are suitable for splitting the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then he should extend the skin of the throat to the epiglottis, then split the cartilage until it reaches the uvula; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the soft palate, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the splitting of the vein of the uvula, which flows out through the opening that is made, and by the failure of the voice; and leave the wound open a little.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed and one no longer doubts about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the heart wound, and heal it completely without the cartilage; then administer medications that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen and the patient is judged dead and the pulse has ceased.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And then they cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound and thus be guarded from death; and for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease passed, which passes in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it until it healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife and stabbed herself in the throat, piercing part of the windpipe; and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found that the blood which had issued from it had not flowed further than the throat, and the windpipe was intact.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound and treated it until it healed; and the lady had no more trouble with her voice, and returned to her former state; therefore I say that one should not fear cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This hernia is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large hernia in color like jaundice, and it occurs often in women; and there are two types: natural and accidental; the natural type has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental type occurs in two ways: one resembles a fatty tumor, and the other is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear of it, and one should not apply force unless it is small, and test and examine all the openings: if you find it just like fat tissue, and it cannot be pushed or moved in any way, then cut it open, as one would a cyst, and treat it thoroughly throughout its entire depth, if there is nothing inside; and examine carefully, and treat it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe; but now I must explain the difference between a nosebleed and a hemorrhage.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that discharge is hot and feverish, as long as the effusion has not passed, and the swelling is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With a nosebleed there is no heat, fever, or pain; and it contains phlegm, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a boil, and becomes swollen; and they are according to two appearances, either dry or moist, and many in color are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of the eye, you should first test and examine it with the instrument called an "optical probe", according to what its shape will appear in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of inquiring into abscesses in the nose is that you press on the most moist spot that you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers slightly, until you feel that the pus has pierced the membrane; then, according to the size of the abscess, extract the instrument and be careful not to push too far.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the pus is thin and of any color, treat it as I have described for other abscesses; but if no pus comes after the incision, know that it is fatty, so cross it with a knife, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape each side, and guard the skin where it lies, that you draw it healthy with the needle; and if you cannot draw it healthy, then draw it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing remains, it will come back many times; and if a little remains, and the wound is not painful to you, employ some corrosive powders on the wound, and press the wound, and apply hot healing poultices, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed; and if the boil is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what produces scabs.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein underneath is contrary to you or another, then hasten and employ the place of vitriol ground, and leave it for two or three days until the wound suppurates and the ebullition of blood subsides; then return to cover what has been delayed by the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the trocar, which come in three varieties: large, medium, and small. There are also three types of handle: one called an "albaret", another a "breb", and a third with three variations: large, medium, and small, used to pierce abscesses and fistulas. They are similar to the needles used to sew up wounds and are made of brass, iron, or silver. The yellow ones are valued more highly and are often used with black thread to close fistula wounds. They come in three sizes depending on the size of the aperture.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the knives are very similar, as you can see: large, medium, and small. There are also knives with two curves that come in three varieties, as well as knives with three curves that come in three sizes. There are also knives with one curve only, which also come in three sizes, and all of these are necessary for their respective purposes.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these instruments are sharp, and there are some that do not cut beyond one side, with which we scorch the nose, so that we do not cut the vein or nerve; and by means of these probes, the veins are bound in wounds, so that the patient does not bleed when opening abscesses; and they come in three types: large, small, and medium, as you see; and we do not use them beyond fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places; and sometimes a small instrument resembling cuts of fingernails is made according to this form, with which blood is staunched:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is put sometimes in the place that heals by gathering veins, and sometimes according to this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell up when they become corrupt, so that they look like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and if anyone wants to cure them, it is necessary to bleed according to this form from b. to g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scorch the fat, and fill the wound with medicine, then bring together the two lips of the wound by suturing, and heal it until it is healthy; and if the nipple droops downward, and becomes soft because of its size as happens to women, then make two cuts above it in the shape of a V; so that one lip is attached to the other at the end of each cut, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form .b. up to the line .g.; then scorch the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary for healing, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, then you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it dissolves the remaining fat and flesh, then heal it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels which are in the abscess have been emptied, employ the wound with soft cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, they should be treated as we have said for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound is closed, the cautery should be administered as mentioned earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is open and the skin above it, this often leads to abscesses, and also causes swelling of the vein; and one can recognize this when it is due to the artery, as the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a pulling sensation; and when it is due to the vein, there is a red and swollen appearance; and it is foolish to cover this kind of abscess, especially when it is below the nipples and in the armpits, neck, and many other places, and it is severe.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore one must avoid cauterizing with iron, and if it is on the head, one must also avoid cauterizing there; and when it is swelling due to an artery, one should cut through the skin from above along its length, then open the artery widely from the artery-vein junction, and gently pull out the artery from its surrounding tissues until it is completely exposed; then insert a needle beneath the skin at one end of the aperture and pierce through to the other side, and draw the artery tightly with a double thread in two places according to how I taught you for the extraction of the two temporal arteries; then pierce the area between the two threads with an incision instrument so that the blood flows out which is inside, and draw out the abscess; then administer the cure that involves cauterizing with a red-hot iron, until the thread loosens; then cure it with appropriate ointments until it heals; and if the abscess is due to the vein, one should take some of the pus from the abscess with one's hand, then insert the needle below the skin where one is holding the hand, and pierce through to the other side, and draw a double thread through so that you can pull the artery tightly in three places; then cut off the superfluous skin from around the abscess, then cut away the superfluous skin of the wound, leaving only what is tied with the thread; then place a moistened cloth in wine and oil over it, then administer treatments with tenting and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come to the artery and vein, they come to the nerves when they are injured, or from too much exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens most often in the shoulders and elbows, and all over where there are joints, and it is called an aposteme, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various states without pain; and when one applies pressure to it, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body but beneath the skin; and it moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, or downward or upward, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron: lest there be contraction; and for that which is on the head or forehead, use a spatumile.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the aposteme is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it with a hook, then scrape off the skin, cut out the bone, and close the wound with stitches, healing it until it is cured.
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	There are times when it occurs in the stomach and nowhere else; it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to ears, with thin roots and thick leaves. There are small ones and very large ones; I saw a man who had two on his stomach that looked more like fungi than anything else, without any difference between them, they were white, had thin roots, and had a split in them, and moisture flowed from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them out and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces; the procedure for the incision is that you should examine whether the disease is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with thin roots; then cut with a spatulum wide enough that the cautery can be applied with fire in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For many times there are dangerous bleeding issues when cutting, and if the blood flows, then quickly use cauterization; and if you see that the patient is frightened and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made thread, tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for 2 days; then constrain it, and do not stop tightening the thread until it cuts the joint, and through it, there will be no pain; and if the roots are thick, then you may fearfully cut into the stomach, but you can cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the stomach which is a discolored color and has poor feeling and milk regurgitation.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are encrusted abscesses, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil has burst
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of a boil comes from cauterization of a wound or from a fissure in the skin, and is on the abdomen and in some of the bowels, as happens in other routs, or from blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from flatulence; and if it is through a rout in the skin and an exit from the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a minor thing without pain, and there are various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it springs back, and sometimes it is constricted, and grows larger at the entrance of the bath and from great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, and does not constrict; and if it is due to blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to flatulence, there is puffiness upon touching, and the work is that you look to see whether the appearance is for blood from an artery or vein, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Then you must let the wound heal.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, because of the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is in the intestine or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to tighten his belt and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the swollen area; then instruct him to lie still between your hands, then go around the area that you have marked all around the spasm, then expose half of the abscess above the great nail; then tie it tightly all around with a strong thread or strong silk cord, and let the patient's hand hang loose; then open half of the abscess stretched over the string, and insert your finger, and feel for the intestine; if you find it caught in the string, then release it from the belt and bring the intestine out of the abdomen; and if you find the bowels, grab them at the nail and cut away the excess; and if the artery or vein is causing trouble, go around it neatly, then return to your task and take two needles, thread two strong wires through them, and insert the needles all around where you made the cross as though you were piercing it; then pull out the abscess in four places along the needles, and when you see it, remove the needles and leave the wound open until it drains, then cut away the dead flesh by itself; once it is thin and draining, clean the wound as needed, then draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as appropriate, and sew up the wound.
dou chancre	the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the types of ulcers and how to treat them with medications, as well as the importance of cauterization with iron. Now, let's talk about ulcers that develop in the mouth, especially in the gums, and similar areas. It is important to treat these early on by removing any dead tissue. However, once they become larger and more established, it is best not to disturb them, as I have never seen one healed through such treatment, nor has anyone else as far as I know.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile sometimes; then make him bleed if he has manifest repletion, then prepare the patient .i. good place to perform the operation; then cut off the nails or calluses, and shave the hair all over, and remove the bone all over without leaving anything; and let the blood flow out completely, and squeeze the site well with your hand or something, and if the bleeding makes you hesitate about cutting the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed in the division the appearances of dropsy, and how the gathering of fluid occurs, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure which is performed by medication, and that which is cured by iron; only these two appearances are described: tympanites and hydrops, for these are mortal conditions. Therefore, when you treat this appearance of dropsy called "eclites" with medication, and the cure does not help, then consider whether the patient is weak, or if they have another illness other than dropsy, such as constipation and similar conditions; in that case, do not use iron, for there is doubt involved. But if you see a strong person suffering only from dropsy, and they are not too young or too old, then proceed as follows: raise the patient upright in your hands, and have an assistant press their abdomen to force the fluid to the lowest part of the feet, then take the spathumile spiny according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let there be a point, and yet not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when one inserts it, nor cause bleeding; then examine if the dropsy is in the intestines: if it is due to the disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the abdomen three fingers wide; and if it is due to the gallbladder, then the incision should be on the right side, and the patient must not lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow into that weak place; then pierce all the way through the skin with your instrument, and plug it up, and leave your hand on the whole spatumile between the skin and the syphon as in skinning to the thickness of a fingernail or nail; then pierce the syphon so that the spatumile comes out at the desired place, and this is the location of the water, then draw it out, and insert your instrument with which you made the incision into the spatumile, and remove the cause:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	It resembles a silver needle, and is made of brass or light bronze, and has a small hole in the lower part; and on one side there are three holes, on another two, and on the other one, and it is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make when they cut feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top is the handle, so that when the instrument comes to the wound, it immediately descends upon the wound; therefore evacuate half or a third of its quantity, for if you evacuate more than is appropriate in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the shock of the instrument or he will faint or approach death; but evacuate according to the amount of his strength and according to what the dispositions of his strength indicate, and according to his pulse; then withdraw the instrument and retain the blood, and it is now retained by the membrane which blocks the hole that I mentioned, about which I have spoken, which you pierce according to this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the next day if you see the patient bearing it, and evacuate a little quantity of blood; do this every day, and beware of fainting until there remains but a little blood.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the disease, leave it a lot of water, and the cure is hot sand or earth, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and by drinking; and the cure is with dessicative medicines until he is healed, and cauterize over the stomach and over the liver and over the spleen after the extraction of the fluid, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without an opening in their penis, or the opening is small and not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary, then pierce it with a very thin spatulum according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place a small piece of lead in the opening and tie it and leave it for 3 or 4 days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, and he will urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps it is not necessary at all, because the urine that comes out does not allow the opening to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose opening is small, if he is medicated with the cloth of lead, as we have said, it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the opening in their place are blocked, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the foreskin, and this is a serious disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of doing it is that the patient lies on his back, then the head and glans of the penis are made as large as a pena, with the opening in the middle as it should be; and take care to prevent bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, stop it with what stops blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these whitlows come on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must grasp them with a very small needle, and cut and clean them all, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on them; then cure it with fine ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, discolored and putrid, then you must apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the ulcer is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside and part outside, then you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is healed, treat the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, if the tip of the penis is not secure and is pierced, blackness and corruption come to the penis and testicles; so everything that is black and corrupt must be cut away, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour from pomegranate rinds and walnuts, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bleeding, administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries are of two types: for bleeding and for corruption; and if the tip of the penis is腐and retracted, one should insert a tube into the penis and let the patient urinate through it; and when there is hair at the tip of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, due to injury or abscess, then one should cut it with an instrument called a 剃刀, so that the foreskin is loose and the tip of the penis is free from all sides; and if it is a painful thing to discuss, one should cut it with a spatulum made of some soft wood at the head of the penis and the skin; then draw it gently apart and place a thin, moistened linen cloth in cold water between them so that it does not become erect again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a dislocation like other wounds; nonetheless, when we do this work of our own volition, and properly on infants, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the least harmful to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not teach the circumcision of their children, because they didn't use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision all around, and in many places, and on all new-born infants; thus it happens that the foreskin shrinks because there are two membranes, and sometimes one membrane is cut above and the other below remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then they recover consciousness, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleansing which is from the head there is not sufficient confidence in the movement of the limb; and in the cleansing of the fingernail perhaps the iron escapes and ruins the work, and many times it happens that they do not need cleaning and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	I have found the goodness of the experiment in the cleansing that is done with strong thread all along the length of the wound, for the stitches cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, you cut evenly across it; but the string should be well tied around the skin; and the method of the first operation is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the string around the rod, and then you make him push it in every way you can; then you hold him straight between your hands, and support his weight with your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see any of the instruments; then put your hand to the rod and breathe on the wound, and pull it up until the head of the rod is in; then cleanse it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the spot marked with a double string, then tie it under the other end; and hold it by the second ligature with your left hand, and pinch between the two ligatures, then quickly lift the wound and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the pus; and put powder on top of the powder, a cloth glued with an egg cooked in rose water, confited with good and fresh rosemary oil, and leave it until the next day, and treat it again until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the force for the purification is such that the two ears should be thin and pointed, and the ears should be as big as the palm equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of the purification is when the incision within the ear drum; therefore, you must stretch it with your fingernail, so that the eardrum forms an abscess; and then, equally, cut it, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for 3 days, and what is under the eardrum is swollen, let it be until the abscesses are soothed and the skin slightly peeled; then cut it as much as you can, and beware of the part of the eardrum, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore treat the site of a sudden wound with powder, as we said in the treatise on powders, and if it bleeds profusely and goes above, it will not harm; therefore treat it, as we said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or similar things that we have mentioned in the previous section. If the urine is not released and you see that it is retained because of a stone which is lodged at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over his knees, with his feet placed on his back, and his abdomen pressed down from above the back. The patient should strain as hard as he can, which forces the neck of the bladder to push out the stone, causing the urine to flow. If this does not work as described, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use an instrument called a "syringe." It should be made of fine silver, as light as the feather of a bird; its shaft should be one-and-a-half palms long, and slender at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the way of the emission of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie to the end a little wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; and soak up the excess wool and insert it into the syringe up to the root of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white; and let the patient sit on a seat, and lubricate the bladder and urethra with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra, then double the penis upwards towards the abdomen; then fill the syringe up to the bladder, and feel the patient's bladder emptying, and if this is not done according to this order, then the guide where it goes is wrong; then pull out the thread all the way through the wool, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out, and let the urine flow; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or bleeding occurs in the bladder, or pus has gathered there, and you see fluids and medicines seeping out, then use the entire instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The location where the medicine is applied should be such that it blocks the urethra without any addition, so that moisture can be extracted and pushed in when needed. When you see your medicines seeping into the bladder, place the tip of the syringe into the moisture and suck out what comes through; this will draw the moisture back into the syringe. Then push the syringe strongly back in and release the moisture inside; it will now enter the bladder and the patient will feel it. This is the way of performing a subtle enema to cleanse the bladder.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or bronze and the head is higher; below, there is one testicle or two, then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture that you want to use to cleanse the bladder. Then tie it between the two testicles with a double thread, and heat up the moisture on the fire. Then insert the tip of the enema into the urethra and squeeze your hand on the bladder gently until the moisture enters; the patient will feel when the moisture reaches the bladder. If you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and cut it in a circle, and pierce small holes around it. Then thread a strong string through these holes, assemble the circle as you would assemble a shield, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water. Then do as you did with the bladder: squeeze your hand until the moisture enters the bladder.
de la piere	of stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction along with medicines; and I have described the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and in which kind of stone one should operate; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the water passes from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and they open their arses, and the patient feels great pain in his penis, and they urinate many times, and then it becomes constipated; and most of these have a hernia; and healing is easier for children until they are four years old, and it is much more difficult in the elderly, and it is in between for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, first it is necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema to draw out all the feces which is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For sometimes it clogs when seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and tilt him upside down so that the stone sinks to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from the upper part; then let him sit between your hands, which are equipped with an instrument, and his hands should be under his thighs so that the bladder is completely tilted downward; then probe and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the opening, then hurry to cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out with the touch, then moisten your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young person; and insert it into their rectum, and probe for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, push it up to the neck of the bladder; then press with your finger, and move it away from where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and instruct the patient to extend his testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum, which is shaped like a spoon.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; and it should be straight above the stone, and both hands should be pressed against the anus, and the incision should be made across the belly so that it is wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; sometimes they press so hard on the hand which is against the anus that it pops out without effort; and know that there are some stones with angles and edges: these are difficult to remove; and there are some which are below, similar to a grape, and round, whose passage is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And for those which have angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not pop out, you should grip it with pincers which are like a file at the tip, to pull out the stone so that it does not slip away; or you put underneath a thin instrument with a curved tip; and if you cannot capture it thus, then widen the opening and if the blood comes out, stop it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, first insert the largest into the neck of the bladder, then push up, then pull it out, and then the smaller ones after if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be cut, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies or the urine comes out through a channel that the wound cannot heal; but in any case, strive to pull it out, or scrape it away with tweezers, until you have removed it bit by bit; and when you have finished your work, apply incense, aloe, and dragon's blood to the wound, and constrict it, and place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then re-bind the patient's wound on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen the bandages, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and corrosions of blood come into the wound and there is congestion in the bladder, and the urine is retained in such a way that it can only exit with the urine: therefore put your finger in the wound and draw out that blood, for if any remains, then it will corrupt the bladder and burst; then wash the wound with water and garlic and salt, and assist the patient in every way you know how until he is healed; and it is necessary that each time you treat him, you bind his two thighs together and assemble the medicines on the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, and it is fixed there, and the urine cannot pass; then the treatment of what I have said above, that you cut many times, is an excuse for not cutting during this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already experienced this myself.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take an iron spike according to this form, and let it be tipped with three angles:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then push the drill into the penis gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the drill with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then urine will flow out at once, then press your hand on what is left of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken at once and comes out with the urine, the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this because of something that hinders, then tie a thread under the stone and another one above it, then push the penis against the stone between the two threads, then pull it out and untie the string, and clean the clotted blood from the wound; and treat it until it is healed.And if there are many stones, treat them all in this way, one after the other.
de la piere des femmes	of stones in women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in women's urinary passages, and if it does, the cure is difficult and prohibited for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a good woman who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman who is well skilled in this art of medicine; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman is deeper than in a man, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity arises, one should take a needle and pierce the bladder, and if one cannot pierce it, do not desire to look for a finer needle; and present a mirror to a wise woman who understands the nature of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you instruct her regarding the inquiry into the stone. And be very careful to check if the woman is a virgin; then she should push her finger into the vagina and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, she should press it under her finger, and recommend that she push her finger into the vagina where the pain is, and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If you find it, you must move it from the bladder gradually until it reaches the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the groin, where the testicle is located and feels the stone in that area; do not move your finger above or below the stone, and make the incision small at first; then pour water into the wound, if you feel the stone cutting through the flesh so that the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and some with veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	So you will know what it looks like to understand the diagnosis.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood vessels are broken and it is bleeding, then apply ground vitriol and hold it in place for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work until the stone is out, and have some tools that I told you about in the extraction of the stone to help you with your task; and if the blood vessels are cut, and it's due to an artery that has been incised, then apply the powder to the site and use bandages and binding, do not re-open the wound, leave the stone alone, or else the patient may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, then return to your task and extract the stone.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	RamiCe aquoUSe n'Is aUtRe choSe QUe aSSemBlEe dE mOiStoR ou blAnC syfAc, QUI eSt dEsOz lOu keUr deS coiOnS, QUe cOnTIenT l'uef; et eSt apeLeZ «Syfac», et aUnqUoe fOIs eSt prOpReMEnt en La ToIlE dE l'uef, SI C'on cUIdE QUe CE sOIt .i. auTre oef; ET CeU n'AvIEnT Se poc Non.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that comes to the intestines, and that matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is yellowish, or red, or black, or watery white, and so on; and these are the signs of how to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have mentioned, then the abscesses are small, as long as an egg, and do not open the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the scrotum itself, then the abscesses are small with part of an egg, and so they think it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphilis, then it feels good. Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test throughout the entire scrotum, from which the form is as mentioned earlier.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, what comes after the foreskin, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he should lie on his back on something slightly raised, and have lots of coverings under him; then he should sit up on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart; then take the spatulum and cut the skin of the ribs in between them from top to bottom, and let the incision be completely straight as you cut the skin of the ribs up to the white cartilage, and scrape it gently according to his strength; then pierce the cartilage with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put in your fingers, and lift the cartilage upwards; and do not touch the heart, but only the cartilage; cut all around it carefully, otherwise the water will come back; and if the egg has jumped out of your work, then put it back in its place when you have finished the work on the cartilage; then join the two lips of the ribs with a single stitch, and then heal it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then you should tie off the vessels that are suspended, fearing a flow of blood; then cut into the wound throughout its suspension, extract the wound, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if water is gathered in two parts together, know that they are two blisters; then grasp the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood and put soft lamb's wool in oil into the wound; and put other soft lamb's wool in wine and oil on top of the blisters, and place doubled linen over them, and bind it all with a ligature following this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two pieces of linen and fill them with lamb's wool according to this form, and sew them together at the groin of the breeches, and one of the heads press onto the fundament up to the back, and the other at the buttock; and the other two heads on the two angles, and have all the ligature tied in a loop of the breeches; and sometimes this blister is treated with cautery instead of cutting with iron, and it is that you grasp the thin blade cultellaire, and grasp the skin of the blisters, and let it be heated as we have said so that the white pus containing water is revealed; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac at its edges, and scorch it with this fine hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cup in every way you can, as long as you stretch everything out; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and move carefully to prevent blood flow, and changes in the incision of the wound; and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscesses or blood flow or anything else, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horribleness, then administer piercing as I have told you, and when you are certain by the signs that we have mentioned that the water is gone, then have the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below to the full width of the spatumile, and insert the piercing tool deep into the body; and let the holes be wide so that all the water flows out; then put cotton over the area and tie it, and leave it to drain the remaining water, then treat the wound until it is healed; and if the white membrane does not allow the water to flow out through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a pen or the instrument used to treat the water in hydrops patients, of which the shape is described earlier; and enlarge the wound, and know that the water will return, and will be assembled again after six months or so, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the dissection of this artery there are several dispositions which cause fear, and therefore it seems better to leave it alone. But I will tell you about its operation and the appearance of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come about in the body, and especially in the testicles; and this happens for many reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is known as a suppurating abscess from an acute disease, either from an old wound or from a blow; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it is a grievous abscess; and sometimes there are grey, fearful, and pierceable abscesses with a flowing color, and occasionally they come from a vein, or from inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from a vein, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and one must not touch it.Si li apostemes se fust si conus par le color de l’artere, si ne covient mie que tu le touches, car il est en la maniere dou mort.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made from the swelling of a vein is known by his appearance and the touch of the fingers, and anyone can make an incision on this appearance and on other marks; and you should cut the skin of the testicles, then the sac will be on top, and the white pus will come out, and release the suspensory ligament from all parts of the sac.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the sac is already infected with these sores, then you must cut it and open it; and if there is pus in the blood vessels, or in what is inside them, then you must release all those veins and cut them cleanly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the egg is in the rear location, then you must grasp it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, then apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to a bud, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when he walks; and the treatment of this disease is just as feared as the one before it, and yet we will tell you about its cure according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspenders of the scrotum tightly with your hands, as well as all the vessels that are close to the penis, and squeeze them firmly; then cut through the vessels with a sharp spatulum, exposing them, and then scorch from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then insert a needle with a double thread where the vein first appeared, and tie it directly to the other end; then draw them together evenly according to the length of the body, and lead out the corrupted moistures; then cure the wound as in the others, or use bowels, so that any vessel that is torn does not nourish one of the testicles; for there is no harm in this, and if a vein appears in all the vessels, then draw the testicles to all the vessels so that the ureter does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rot of the eye socket
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this hernia are through the incision that comes from the scrotum, or the extension over the abdomen in the region of the groin, causing the intestines to descend from that opening to one of the testicles; and this opening is either in the scrotum or from the extension of it, and these two types of hernias come from many causes: from a blow, or a jump, or a fall, or from lifting a heavy load, and from similar things; and the sign that it is from an extension of the scrotum is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the hernias are even all the way to the bottom, because the scrotum presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when it is from the section of the abscess, that it brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear diverse, beneath the skin close to the surface, and that is for the exit of the intestines and the body from the abscess.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with the abscess, and are retained inside, and cause great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron with fear, from which one should keep away.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the way to treat it is to instruct the patient to draw the intestines back into the wound with his hand if he can; then hold his neck between your hands and lift his hips; then press the abdomen above, and pull up all the skin of the scrotum from the bottom; then push in the edges of the incision with your fingers according to what you need to open the wound, so that the testicles can come out; then scrape off the scrotum that is under the skin of the testicles, until the hard white scrotum is exposed all around; then put your index finger into the opening next to the testicle, in between the white scrotum and the second testicle, and between the testicle and the second scrotum; and then move your right hand into the scrotum, and lift up the white scrotum towards your left hand, and lift the testicle up towards the scrotum; and tell the assistant to push the testicle up, and untie what is behind the ligature; and feel with your fingers if there is any of the intestine wrapped around the hard white scrotum, and if you find anything, then put it back into the abdomen below; then take a needle that has a thick thread made from ten fibers, and push it through the back part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; then pull up the threads that appear, until there are four threads; then tie them together in the form of a cross, and tie the scrotum with a strong ligature in two places; then wrap the threads around the scrotum, and tie it tightly in two places, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can get through, and no hernia will come; then put the ligature back according to the first long ligature two fingers from that one; and after those two ligatures, leave the scrotum that is under the skin of the testicles hanging, as much as a finger's length; and then cut in the part that is under the skin of the scrotum, so that the blood flows, as we have said before; then apply soft lamb's wool soaked in oil to the wounds, and put on the ligature that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white cotton that we have described is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leave the ligature in place until it cuts through; and if it is slow to fall out, then use hot water, and apply what we have said, until it cuts through; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients say that it is made like the root of the weed, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above slightly towards the inside; then press gently, and treat the abscess with what we have described, until the vessels cut through; and treat it as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes the rupture occurs in the veins, as we have said, and the orifice opens; and no intestines emerge from the anus, and if some do emerge, it is a small amount, and one must keep watch over them at all times; and if they remain too long in this state, then the wound becomes putrid and suppurates, just as we have said, because the blood vessels are extended, then become soft and swollen and open; and it is treated with cautery, as we have already said; and sometimes it is treated with iron in the following manner: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, then press gently on the rupture where it is swollen with salt according to its size, about the amount of three fingers; then extract the blood vessel which is under the skin that has become suppurated, then take the vein and place it over the visible area of the blood vessel; and press it firmly into the abdomen, then cut the two visible ends of the blood vessel on the head of the vein, and cut them both; then extract the head of the vein, and do not cover or extend the suppuration or anything else, just as I have instructed you in the treatment of a rupture in the intestines; then treat it with the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, clean and treat the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The vein is constricted, and has no appearance in the rupture, and cauterization is more effective in this case, and closer to recovery.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum softens in some men because the testicles within are softened, and it appears milky white; and when one wishes to treat it, he should make the patient lie on his back, and cut away the softened skin above the natural membrane; then join together the two edges with a single stitch, or up to four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You should know that castration is considered evil in our religion, and for this reason I would prefer not to discuss it in this book. It is only necessary for two purposes: the first is so that the healer can answer questions about it and know how to perform the procedure; the second is because we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, goats, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say, therefore, that castration is performed in two ways: either by pullin
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method we perform by pulling, we have the animal sit in hot water until the testicles become soft and pendulous; then we grip them with our hand until they come off and we no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the castration of a stallion: you should hold the horse still, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and strike each testicle once, after you have properly skinned them; and I leave some pus of the syphilis and the subtle syphilis which is over the vessels; and this manner of castration is better than that which is done by attraction, because with attraction something of the testicles might remain, causing the horse to desire lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism in horses occurs in two ways: one is that between the testicles there appears something like the form of a woman's nature, and it has hair, and sometimes urinates from it.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, who have above the vagina a penis and testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of men and women is that you dress all the sores just as with other wounds; in the second way, men whose urine escapes through the skin of their scrotums have no cure.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tentwound is an open sore on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to look at; and some women have them as large as a hand, and that is the cure for it.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You must stain the excess of the tentwound with your hand or fingernail, and cover it lightly; and do not go too deep, lest bleeding occur, then treat it with another cure until it is healed; and for another wound that arises at the mouth of the sores, and apply it, and perhaps it will come out, and is like a cow's udder, and so they call it the "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must treat it, as we have said about the tendon, and cure it until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is erratique when the nature of the woman is not understood, or the passage is small; and it is natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that comes about; or it is caused by a foreign object, or from a subtle or thick phlegm, and it is formed deep in the womb, or on the sides, or below, or wherever; and they must be understood through examination of the vagina.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the tampon is nearby and apparent, grab it with your fingers or with a thread.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is from a subtle phlegm and it is nearby the lips, do this: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the lips, so that the subtle phlegm is sucked in, and overcome the tampon; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the area, and have the woman rest at home every day, so that it does not adhere.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	If the syphilis is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatulum like a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is of fresh flesh, then dry it and cut it; and have blood-stopping remedies like açaí, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white; then insert a wide plug of wool so that the wound cannot close up; and let it be so for a long time, and then insert a tent of dry linen; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when fresh flesh comes in the wound, it should be cut according to this manner, unless it is a deep abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For one must not touch an abscess that is deep in the wound.Et si il est alerge et pochon, si covient qu’il soit incisez sus li pochon et li alerge, si que il soit evacuez la mater, et que il ne vout remas.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood flows without a short-term remedy, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become throbbed; and we have already said in the section on their appearances, signs, and I will now mention those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and throbbed veins, when they are deeply embedded in the anus and do not appear upon examination, can only be cured by a cautery of fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which one can feel, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should place the woman in a cold room, then constrict the hemorrhoid with tweezers and pull out its roots, then apply a powder of restraining blood medications such as astringent acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and similar things; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, gales, and similar things, then take barley flour, cook it with honey and garlic, and apply it as a poultice to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is stopped, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him vomit with bellows on his back and breasts without piercing; then take woolen cloth, and moisten it in juice of plantain or in juice of dogwood with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles rough skin, so it should be covered as I have said before; then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	and wounds of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come about in the bowels, such as sores and piercing abscesses and herpes and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases which I have mentioned in the section on diagnosis.Et quant li sang est vout de la veine ou de l’artere ou de la fime, si doit il estre curé a breff temps, si qu’il ne vienne al corps nule lesion.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	In this treatise, I shall discuss the hot abscess that appears in the body, which is not among the abscesses that form in the bowels; and if you wish to know how to treat it, observe whether the abscess is firm at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and whether it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not hurry to pierce it, but let the pain subside first; then have the patient sit on a chair, and have two small chairs for him to lean on, and support his back and rest his feet on something below his knees; tie his arms under his knees, and then suck the boil towards the right armpit, and insert the instrument used to open the abscess, after which its shape becomes apparent; when you insert this instrument, push it in only slightly at first to feel how deep the abscess is, so that what goes into the abscess does not go in further than it should, and does not hurt the patient; if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the abscess with cloth so that it does not cause discomfort; then have him hold the cone-shaped part of the instrument against the abscess, and tighten the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and they make it in the soft hand, then one must cover the head, or spathanum light; and when the bowels are emptied, then you should put in the wound tents moistened with rose oil, or with dry green oil; and put the tent out of the wound at the bottom of the injury, and put under the injury and over the small, clean lamb's wool moistened with water or mallows cooked; then heal after two days of ointment, until it is healed; and sometimes lift up the injury and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then with water or roots of iris and aristology cooked for a long time; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is drawn back into the injury, then you should be careful not to cook with iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary for the midwife to first know the natural form of childbirth and its signs, which occur when you see the woman breathing quickly and desiring to smell aromatics. Then the child hastens to come out; then you know that this childbirth follows nature's course, and the afterbirth comes out with the child, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses through proper cleansing. But those who give birth in a different way do not give birth naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Sometimes the child comes out feet first, or head first but upside down, or by the arms or the shoulder; sometimes it comes out from the stomach or the side, and it can get stuck in the neck or other unnatural positions. So the midwife must be wise and cunning in these matters, guarding against mistakes and disappointments, and I will now describe all the different ways to assist childbirth.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby is born head-first naturally but the mother is struggling and her vitality is weak, make her sit on a chair or have other women support her. Prepare an emollient of rose oil or fried fenugreek, and then the midwife should insert the small spatulum into the vagina to dilate it gently:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and split the amnion, and press his fingernail against it until the moisture within flows out; and press the woman's abdomen so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then a clyster must be administered to the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and olive oil; then make her sneeze and cough from the condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will emerge.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands emerge, then you must gently reset them little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet upward; then raise the chair off the ground, and lean her forward so she does not strain while standing; and if the hands still cannot enter, and the child is dead, then press their hands with the nail as mentioned before, extract the child, and reset in the same way.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the child's issue upon his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out on his feet, he should be pushed upward; then turn him slowly, until he is straightened out; then grasp one of his feet and stretch him out slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he leaps just up to the crotch, instruct him to grasp and cause the mother to sneeze; then if God wills it, he will leap out.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump out as we have said, then slowly turn it back and forth until it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he does not come out as we have described, take musk, altae oil, gum, and broil it all in the mortar; and apply this ointment to the mother's abdomen, then let her sit in warm water up to her ribs; and when she is soft underneath, place the myrrh collar on her, and let her sit for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then sneeze and squeeze her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for now the child will come out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	with the birth of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands on its head little by little; then he leans over its neck, and its feet hang down, and it lies on its back; and he bends his hands little by little, and then presses them on the belly, and removes the cushions underneath, until it is straightened out below; and if the child does not cry, he takes hold of its feet and moves them about, then he moves the belly upstream, then he blocks his hands in; and he rocks the child little by little; and he commands the woman to hold on until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child which comes from a width of one hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I will try to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed and raise her legs; then administer the mustard paste that I described earlier; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, then try to bring back the hand; then deliver the child as nature intended, and make her sneeze, and command her to hold on until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the emergence of the child onto its neck, and spread out his hands, and turn his face towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I desire the bailiff to dye his hand, then turn it little by little, and move it gently; and when it is even, he puts on the nature of mustard and oil, as we have said, then he commands that it moves little by little; and when you have done this, make him sit on a seat, and command that he grip; and make him sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all of the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out in this way to all the afterbirth, then grasp the afterbirth with your fingernail, so that the moisture is emptied; and if the infant can reach his face and neck, grasp him from the side, so that he is not retained and dies; then insert the infant inside, so that you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to grip something a few times: then she will give birth easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twin's birth
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; this is not a strange thing, but it happens seldom.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	These are strange things, and do not live, unless by name; I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the phlegm which divides them, which is bound to the brain; and sometimes they issue naturally like a tail, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue greatly, then the cure as we have said, and let the doctor be skillful, and do quickly and skillfully what she does; and do thus as it benefits the patient.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the brain, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is necessary that the doctor know this, because sometimes similar things happen; so act according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman for a dead fetus or womb, as I have said in the previous section, and there is no movement, forcing you to use manual labor; then you must know whether the woman has good health and does not fear death. Then the woman should be laid on her back, with her head inclined downward and legs raised; and she should be given a enema with an injection tube in two parts, or she can lie down in bed so that she is not strained during the delivery of the child. Then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with myrrh, fenugreek, and flax seed; then anoint her hands with these oils and myrrh; then gently insert the injection tube, and watch out for signs that the fetus is descending towards the head. Then insert the tube into its ears, neck, mouth, palate, under the beard, in the nostril, or near the sides; if the descent is towards the feet, insert it into the heel and the lower leg. The tube should be held with the right hand, and the bulb between the fingers of the left, and gently squeeze the bulb all the way to the fingers, then insert the tube into one of the places we have mentioned until it reaches the void; this is the shape of the tube:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then push against the other nail, or the third if you need it, so that the extraction is even; and then they are evenly pushed from one side to the other, to draw them out, and the nails are bit down to hold them in place, as this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some remains, then anoint the fingernail of one of his fingers with oil and rub it in that part, and pull out the other part; and if nothing remains, then put this nail or a higher one, and do this until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it is all out; then grab the joint of the palm or the wrist, and so you must do for the other hand, and for the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, where there is sharp pain gathered at the head, then you must use a spatulum between your fingers to loosen the head and draw out the fluid; or you may pierce it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one. And in the same way, do if the child has a large natural head; then pull on the bones with tweezers, and if the shoulder is stuck and strained, split it so that the fluids inside the narrow passage come out; and if it cannot pass, cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, you must pierce it until the fluids run out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, the pull is slight, and the movement towards the mouth of the wound is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stuck in the belly or the birth canal, then you must strain it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and cut into the belly or the birth canal so that the fluids inside come out; and if other limbs are stuck, and the shoulder remains, then insert your finger into the mouth of the birth canal, and pull until the baby's head comes out; then grab its ankle or ankles, and pull them out. And if the mouth of the birth canal is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it, but instead apply moist and greasy remedies; and the provider applies poultices, and softens and moisturizes with water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the fetus is on its side, and you can bring it to an even position, then proceed as we have said for a live child; and if one cannot, then pull it out in pieces, leaving nothing of the afterbirth behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if pus comes out as we have said for abscesses that occur in the uterus; and if there is bleeding, then it should be treated with hot water, and other remedies should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I also saw a woman whose child had died in her womb, then she gave birth to another on top of it, and the other died as well.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, she got an abscess in her armpit, which swelled up so much that it opened and began to discharge a lot.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the priest, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong吸引plaster, and an bone came out, and after a few days, some more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I have used this treatment, and with it I have saved a woman's life; and she lived for a long time afterward, and only occasionally had a little pain in that place; and I have not known of this chapter failing when, upon discovering an unusual condition, the physician knew how to apply a remedy.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the dislocated joint to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the press, to which one applies books; and at two turns at each shoulder from the two lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the instrument should be more delicate if it is to be used with a restrictive forceps, and should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the forceps should be two digits wide, and the margin of the trees should be one-and-a-half digits long; and in both limbs there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are firmly attached to one another, each half a digit or a little longer; and these two adjustments are inserted into the uterus to open it when the two prongs are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, with its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tweezers; and has at both ends two adjustments, as you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide; and when you see open the wound by all the instrument, then let the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs open, then fit together the two adjustments in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; then work your hand on the whole instrument, as you have done with tweezers equally, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the wound, so that the midwife does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all decorated, and they have many similarities; and when the patient sees them prepared, he is more eager for the operation, and more confident due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair of the instrument until you have prepared it, for their need is不可避.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained in childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold back her breath, then make her sneeze with a scent, and pinch her nose and mouth with your hands; and if she vomits through this, that is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, they take the pot and make a hole in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as comfrey, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over fire; then they put one end of the tube into the pot and the other end into the mouth of the wound, and they apply it until the vapors enter the wound; then they make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then cut out the pus gently.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment and does not come out, as we have said, command the midwife to moisten her left hand in oil of sesamum or in mullein, and then put it into her body, and seek the afterbirth; and when she has found it, she should grasp it and stretch it little by little straight, so that the wound does not tear; but she must move it slightly from right to left, and then pull out; it will come out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the wound is closed, we have spoken of the cure for sneezing and of the fumigation of herbs; but if it does not heal from all that we have said, then beware of going astray in the treatment; but it is necessary to tie what is at the mouth of the wound to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with the ointment of the four-fold remedy, then she will discharge and recover, but nevertheless, when she discharges, a foul odor comes to the stomach and head, and the illness is cured.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So therefore appropriate fumigations are necessary: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman is for the retention of flowers and the afterbirth, if it is that:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like glass in appearance, and one puts the small end into the nature, and the wide end above the fire; and there is fumigation over the coals, and the infection until it is wasted, and one begins another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without their navels pierced, but with the umbilical cord attached to a small, slender stalk; therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this stalk with her finger, and not with a sharp instrument, and to guard against piercing the membrane; then she should put wet linen in wine and oil on it, then it will heal.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt it will heal, insert a wooden peg into the hole and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to go in rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this filling comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; it should then be stopped suddenly: then it should be treated as we have said with the wooden peg.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula in the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular and grow larger than those that come from within the anus, or in the space between the two parts, whether there is one fistula or several; and when this nodulation is old, it opens and emits moisture, a white discharge, or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent. They are perceptible by what comes out of them, either through evacuations or flatulence, when the patient passes gas, and sometimes they burst out suddenly.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they can reach the joint of the thigh, and up to the scrotum.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so one knows whether the fistula in the anus is persistent or not; and it is known by putting your finger into the anus, and pushing a thin needle made of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has a twisting, one puts in a thin rod made of lead or a horsehair until you feel the rod at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there comes no discharge, flatulence, or pus out of the opening as we have said, then know that it does not penetrate; so hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has pierced through to the bladder or the urinary tract, and the urine flows out, and cannot be stopped with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perceived just to the joint of the thigh, then the vein is flowing just to the site; if there is no twist and the pain is located around it, then it has settled there and is not helped by medicine or ointment; and in these persisting fistulas, there is no cure other than labor and the folly of those who meddle.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one that is not persisting and is not old, there is hope of recovery by iron, as I have experienced, and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you lift his legs up to his thighs, and bend his thighs towards his belly; then insert a tent made of bronze or lead if there is twisting, until you know where the vein leads.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around his anus, then you must insert your index finger there if the vein has not yet pierced through; and examine where you feel a lump or a boil between your finger and the flesh, and thus you know that it is persisting; do not treat one who has such a condition.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can indeed heal some of them, but this happens rarely; and the aid that one provides is to heat the delicate cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been said before; and put it all hot into the fistula, until it reaches the anus; and do this twice or three times, until you know that the false flesh, which resembles the feather of a bird, has been burned away; and then cure with moist tent fabric, until the flesh is gone, and then cure with ointment to close up and heal.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is healed thus, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is not healed thus, it cannot be otherwise; and if the tent enters and does not pierce all the way to the rectum, which is at the anus, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or pus, and you see the fistula following the covering towards the anus; then cut off the fistula at its beginning, and put in the cautery again before the tent, and then the cautery after, until it reaches the top of the tent; and the tent will be released and fall out; then remove those false fleashes that resemble a bird's feather, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus runs out, and cuts between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery draws together two things: that is, it burns the joined flesh and dries up the blood and moisture; then, treat the wound with moist tenting on butter or crushed substance until the skin oozes fluid and the burned flesh comes out in the fluid; then, treat the wound with ointments of hardened oil until the medicines dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Because when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way to the surface from the depths, and is distant from the body, put your finger or a plug in it, and probe it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between two is the thread or flesh, or it is close to piercing, there should be no fear or worry through administration of one of three methods: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to the bone, or if you can, place tents and treat it as first described; do not go too deep so that you do not cut into the lining which holds the foundation, and let the evacuations occur through there willingly; then treat it as described; by chance it will heal. Or remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut away from the foundation, either with tents or another pointed instrument; then mend that injured flesh in the wound, and work to stop the fistula in the part distant from the foundation: this is a gentler method for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are created in this way: and it is when you drive the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side next to the foundation underneath the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	and insert a twisted thread into it in two parts, and insert the tent all along the thread into the fistula as far as the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that opening, so that you drive your finger into the foundation; and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and tighten them against each other, and leave it for one or two days; and sometimes they are tightened until the threads cut through what is between them, and they separate; then cure the wound until it is sewn up and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, then make it open in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to cover the wound with a bandage right away, before cleaning it, as we have said, until it has healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spathula for creating a fistula is pointed at one end and smooth at the other; and on the one hand it is not pierced, so that one does not pierce what one should not, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some discharge blood, and there may be one or several of them, and they are outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture, and sometimes there is a little yellow water or a little blood, and they are the color of the body; and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is to instruct the patient to strain to go to the toilet until the veins break and the threads appear; then you can hurry and grasp it with tweezers, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots; and if the nails cannot hold it because of moisture, they are grasped with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel's hair; and pull it out with your fingers, then cut it, and powder some hot powdered medicine on top that is suitable for cauterization; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, then treat other hemorrhoids until he is healed; and if the anus cannot be cleared, then cleanse the patient with a strong and sharp enema to wash away what is inside the anus so that it can be cleared completely; when the patient strains, and if the threads come out of the anus, then the cure is easy; you grasp them with your fingernail or tweezers, cut them, then treat them as we have said until he is healed and fears incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must administer stitches in this way: take a twisted thread, and insert it into a needle, and then pull the thread through from the top, and pierce the needle on the other side; turn both ends of the thread beneath the needle, and keep it loose; then tighten the thread, tie a knot, and remove the needle. Do this for all the others, and leave one to stop any excess bleeding. Then place a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate over the wound, and order the patient to rest; then let him lie there until he urinates, and when he has finished urinating, treat the wound with ointment and other remedies until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the anus or rectum
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a drying up of the bowels within the intestines, due to the constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine fails.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must cut into the skin at the tip of a spur or your nail, so that it does not become moist; then treat it until it is dry as it should be; and if it cannot heal, then restart the bleeding more forcefully than before, until it heals completely and is scoured; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	where it trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ant is a small appearance formed under the body, and goes very deep; and sometimes the frost bites it, and they feel it like dead from trembling, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a feather of a goose quill, or a strong vulture feather, and place this feather on the trembling, so that the purple circle encompasses the trembling all around; then turn your hand over the entire feather, so as to rub all around the trembling, pushing it deeply in, and draw out the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that you should make it of a cane of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and drawn out on top:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, so that you can hold it with your fingers, and press it, And if you see, cauterize the tremor, as it is before in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of molten copper or chainmail; and sometimes they are made small and large, depending on those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those which are administered for curing children, and who are feeble and suffering, are made small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is above broad; or the bellows are bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there is a division where the belly is tied, as you see, and the anus is pierced within; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other; and the belly is made into a bag of beast skin or parchment, pierced all around with small holes, and between each opening there is an inch of space, then insert strong thread twisted in a cross or spiral pattern around the belly, like a thong; and when the medicine is inside, attach it to the instrument in front with a strong string, then catheterize; and this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	Let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the syringe with oil or egg white, or similar, then insert it gently; then the minister should squeeze the syringe with both hands simultaneously until it is empty, then remove the syringe and let the patient lower his legs to the floor, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him squeeze as much as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterward, it is even more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema him for a disease of descending stomach, and the medicine is in a hurry to come out, then let him strain until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the rectum or anus, then the syringe should be as fine as for a child; and this is how to make the fine syringe that the skin will not tear:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will discuss manual and medicinal cures according to their accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and what makes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that cause wounds are the piercing of stones, and the cutting of swords and knives, or lances, staves, arrows, and similar objects; and they can occur anywhere on the body, such as a wound on the neck, head, leg, belly, liver, and similar organs; and I will tell you how to cure each type of wound, starting with wounds on the head, since their treatment will be described in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large, and you easily doubt a hot abscess: then make him bleed from the cephalic vein immediately if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the injured part; and prevent the patient from drinking wine and eating heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, then let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine or eat meat; and put sorb on the wound, if hot abscesses come, cotton moistened only in rose oil or in astringent wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then put powder on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air; and if the burn has moved him, then put some ointments on it until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword, and the lips cannot be brought together by sutures, then bring them together by stitches, as I will say for wounds in the abdomen, from the ribs.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be probed, and it only hangs on by a little bit, then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find pus in the skin, and it is not near the bone, then probe and drain all the pus, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which does not clot, and it cannot be stopped with medicine, then ligate the artery, and if that does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: you should apply this powder that heals as soon as the scorch has healed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part, dragon's blood two parts, quicklime three parts, and powdered very finely, and apply it to the wound, and press it firmly so that it becomes well-adhered and united with all its blood; then bind it tightly, and leave it without removing, if it does not become swollen; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with chalk alone, when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but the wound has been burned.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved the wound, especially in this way, do not put any of this powder on it; but place some digesting ointments, or a poultice made of barley flour, water, and honey, until it is healed; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if there is a bone fracture with the wound, and it is small, I will extract it with subtle pincers; and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a nerve, there is nothing else to do but let the cure happen, and not put anything constricting on it, because it hurts the nerves and makes them withdraw; and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but the medicine should be beneath, like a cold wash in lukewarm water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked wash also in lukewarm water, and other stones of the same kind, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut it and tie it with bands, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is chapped and full of pus, then pierce it or a lower place; and if the artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, then bind it, and cauterize if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the larynx, and the windpipe is blocked, preventing the meat from going down, then cut the larynx on the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then bind it properly, and leave it for a few days, then treat with ointments until it heals; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then pierce it; and if there are pieces of bone, then draw them all out if you can, and those that you cannot reach, then leave them until the wound becomes purulent and is relieved, and ligate the wound; and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder I have described.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then examine whether the wound bleeds at all: thus you know that the wound is deadly; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it for the blood which trickles out profusely, and returns to the body, and chokes off the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, then put old cotton into the wound to suck up moisture, and let the patient sleep with his head on the wound for three or four, or more days; thus there will come no spasms, nor bad tremors of the body, nor convulsions. And when you see good signs, you know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure it therefore with tenting and other remedies, until it is healed; and if it cannot be healed, and the wound is still open, then you know there is a fistula; so cure it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, in front or behind, then cure it as with that which is before; if it is large, then stitch it; and if it is small, then powder it, and if it is depressed into the bone, and pieces have been knocked out, then clean the wound, and draw out the foreign bodies if they are loose; and if they are not loose, then let the wound fester so that extraction will be easier; and for other wounds in other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from a rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	There are many types of hernia: some occur in the great wound, some in the small, and some in both. The great wound sometimes causes the intestines or nerves of the intestines to protrude through it; stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because it is harder to stitch up the intestines little by little when they are inflamed by the cold; they swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they are harder to stitch, and a small wound is better in this case because you can stretch the intestines back into place more easily. There are four types of abdominal hernia: two common types occur with stitching up the abdomen, and the other two types are specific to other wounds on the body; nonetheless, they are also applicable to abdominal wounds, and I will explain each type.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine has come out, and there is a desire to put it back, this can be done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in such a way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in warm water only, or cook it in water with squills and cypress and spike lavender, and swab the intestine until the swelling is relieved; sometimes this wine constrictor is made, and it is poured out solely to reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling leaving, moisten the intestine with water or old wine in which mallows and marigolds have been cooked; for through this there is an adhesion to the entrance of a little thing. And if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is preferred over cutting, which one must not do without great necessity; and the instrument for splitting is: cut inside at the curve and push out, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, he puts them back in according to their natural form in their proper place, if you have the strength to do so, because this is much better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is low in the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs above his head; and if it's high in the abdomen, he should lie down with his head and feet lower than the rest of his body, and if the rupture is on one side or the other, then he should be positioned so that the wounded part is higher. And you must apply what I say to large and small wounds alike.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what you have at hand and hold in your hand a pair of forceps that touch all around the wound, and this is how you should sew: thread an needle or several according to the size of the wound, leaving two fingers' width from the top of the wound, then insert an needle through both sides of the skin below the skin, going through the skin itself, and pierce it in that spot, then tie off the thread around the needle with a double thread; then bring the two sides of the wound together gently, and then leave another two fingers' width, and insert another needle; then tie the thread around this second needle as you did the first, and keep doing this according to how many needles you need, until the entire wound is closed. The needles should be medium-sized, not too thin or too thick, so that they can pierce through the skin and flesh without reopening the wound; then bend the needles so they don't scratch the patient when he sleeps, and attach tents or pieces of cloth to the ends of the needles to hold them in place, leaving them until the wound is healed. This method of sewing with needles is best for small wounds, as a single needle or two will suffice. The second method of sewing is common, and it involves holding the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the subcutaneous tissue together with one needle and a strong thread; once you have pierced all four layers, bring the needle back to where you started, as if you were sewing a garment; leave a distance of a minor finger between each stitch. This sewing method works for both men and women, and I used it on a man who had been stabbed in the abdomen; the wound was more than a palm wide, and his intestines protruded two palms out, and the wound was in the middle of his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought him back his intestine after it had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up until the 15th day, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And they had judged him to be dead, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where there was no medicine or ointment; and I put clean cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water and honey until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you about the two proper ways to sew: take the needle and push it from the outside through to the inside; when it has pierced right through, hold the thread where it emerges on the inside and pull it through from the other side until the outside is touched again; the idea of this sewing is that you sew just as the leather-workers sew pelts, leaving a little thread on one side and then taking it up on the other, until the seam is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, which Galen describes properly, is like that used by some to join two pieces of cloth together naturally, and they apply one end of the thread to the other, in such a way: insert a needle at the tip of the wound nearby, and pierce only that spot, leaving the two ends of the wound; then turn the needle and pierce from the outside part inward to the inside, through both ends of the wound; then pierce one and then the other from the outside part inward to the inside, in two other tips of the thread that are on the other side; and this is the mother method of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this, and some testify to it: one should sew the belly with two needles, with thread in each; and one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds; and know that when the hernia is in the abdomen, the sewing is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgement of the wound is the same as the judgement of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, so that the burn has moved, then put back the intestine, and the membrane; then put on the powder, and if the burn has moved, put on some ointment, as long as the wound bleeds; then tie the thread, and sew up the edges, and the lip; then cure the wound as others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicine, put on, as soon as it begins to bleed, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you don't need any other medicine in various dispositions when wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal members, then it is necessary to moisten light linen in tempered warm oil, or rose oil, and put it around the angles, and under the armpits; and if there is pain or swelling in the bowels, and it happens many times, then cleanse them with a clyster of tepid black wine, and likewise if the swelling comes up to the intestine; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines, which are called 'young', cannot heal when they are raw, and this is due to the thinness of the veins through which they are, and the subtlety of the whole body, and their proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the skin jumps out of the wound, then put it back as you would with the intestines, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become green or black, then you should tie off the area which is black so that no blood flow comes from it, for there are veins and arteries in it; then cut what is between the stitch, and place the two sides hanging down from the part under the wound until extraction when the skin slips, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the road of boiling
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small, then one can heal it in some people, for I saw a man who was pierced in the belly with a lance; and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and was swollen and became a fistula, and from it came digestion and flatulence; I applied a poultice according to what I could, and did not cease subtilizing until it healed and the edges joined.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him bleeding, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be bound in such a way: take a large testicle, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the testicle has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it squeezes its mouth shut; and then tie the testicle, and it will stay as it is so that it cannot come undone, then put another testicle after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed; and heal the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If it bleeds in the intestines and does not harm the patient, one can tie the intestines with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine, in this way: take the tip of the intestinal thread that is very dry, then tie to the tip of the thread a fine linen thread twisted tightly, then insert the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and pull it shut; and this method of sewing with testicles is not effective except according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the grail-like intestines, there is nothing that helps except skill.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula", and especially when it is swollen and becomes bow-shaped.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the green node, a hard and white swelling, where there is no pain, and is like the comb of a bird; sometimes it is clearly swollen, and sometimes thick; sometimes small, and sometimes large; and I have already spoken about these causes, and their signs, and the cures for medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I will tell you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and from arteries, and from nerves, or from the sinus, or from the intestines, or from the bladder, or from any of the sides, or from the spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes to the principal property of the primary member, and in similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this way are of grief and healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it being understood, then take an iron or bronze tent, if the fistula is straight, so pick it up; and if the fistula is crooked, then search with a thin tent of lead, for the lead bends around the crookedness; and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot well search it with tents, then cleanse it by enema through one of the openings, for moisture cuts from one opening to another, and cleanses it; then pick it up bleeding as hard as you can, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and see how deep it is, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where he feels it; and when you know for certain the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or any of the places I told you, then treat it according to what I have told you, and remove the rotted matter and corruption that is inside; and then heal it as it heals, and if the fistula is very deep and straight, then you must pick it up as much as you can, then place moist tents soaked in medicine water, and put them into the fistula to the head, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom; and then apply healing ointments to clean flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then pick it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve causes you no pain in the limbs, as we have said, and if the bone is exposed and there is decay and darkness, then treat it as follows: cut out the decayed part, then treat the wound with healing remedies until it is healed; and if it is not healed, return to the previous treatment, understanding that you have not yet reached the bottom. Then explore and dig until you reach the bottom, remove all the decay, then restore the area; and if it is healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, understand that the decay is too deep for you to reach; then do nothing but let nature take its course; and if there is a small decayed bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, then extract it with the appropriate instrument for this purpose, and if there are several bones, pull them all out, not leaving any behind. And if moisture causes you problems, and there is no doubt or fear, then cut out the moisture and decay, and heal the wound.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place something over the wound to promote swelling, and let it swell around the bones, and then the bones will come together more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, then clear away the corruption only until the blackness is gone, then dress the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption, and it reaches down to the bone marrow; then it must be cut and covered all the way to the corruption, and then the wound treated until it heals. And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid from this in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from inside the body, so that the materials came to the leg and swelled into a large abscess, and there was no way to drain it; but the doctors, through their foolishness, worked on it until the abscess burst, and much material flowed out, and it became a fistula, and there were many openings from which flesh and moisture from the body flowed; and many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine, so that I was called to him, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was treated, and what flowed out through the openings into a great illness; and the skin of the young man turned red, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of the holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that one came against another throughout the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened therefore, and probed one of the holes until I exposed a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption extended to the bone within; I applied what appeared to me to be necessary for the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except that which I removed; and then I began to heal the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but could not close it; so I began again, and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and applied treatment to it, and then removed it, and labored to close the wound; but I could not, though I probed around the bone for a palm's width, and drew it out entirely from its socket, and then restored it with medicines; and it healed quickly, and needed no further probing except because of the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was completely healed, and a hard lump grew in place of the bone, and he had a good disposition and no harm or contrary pain anywhere, neither when lying down nor when rising up.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, it should be bound in this way: take a thread and bind it to the head of the open bone, and command someone to pull it upward; and tie another longer piece of linen over the thread, and place it over the lump that has grown on top of the bone, and draw the thread so that you draw the corrupt lump underneath downward, and uncover the flesh above where you see it is being bound, so that the thread does not cut into the flesh; and place a hot iron or a flat object underneath the bone to cover the corrupt lump; and one must bind it as tightly as possible as far as one can see and feel the corruption, and then bind it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is broken and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh; then put a hot iron underneath, and then press the corruption from one side to the other, and press it with the palm of your hand from the edge of the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, then cut the corrupt joint, and press on the bone where it contains it on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of both joints, there is no need to cover it; and if the corruption is in the knuckle of the hand or foot, that thing is very strong, but nevertheless you must inquire into this corrosion, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in every way you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not harm you; and know that there are many knives and probes for covering these bones, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of them, their thickness and thinness, and size and smallness, and hardness. And therefore one must prepare for each appearance of work its instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the instrument which you need, according to what it needs.
dou feu	by fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head can be dislocated due to internal causes or external forces; and when you have treated this corrosion with medicine, but it does not help, then cover the affected member up to the point where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater evil, from the defect in the member; and the signs are that the member becomes black, as if burned by fire, and after the blackness, the corrosion spreads from one member to another, and affects the whole body; so be quick to cover it, and if it is due to the bite of venomous creatures, such as the scorpion fish and adder, and similar, if the corrosion is on the head, then cover it, and do not give it any space to spread to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, then cover it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not spread to the arm; and if it reaches the arm, then cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is fatal, and there is no remedy except in proportion to the amount of its virtue; and thus one should act when the corrosion reaches the foot: if it reaches the first joint, then cover it after the other joint; and if it reaches the foot, then cover all of the foot; and if it climbs up the leg, then cover at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy except to cut off the limb and let the patient die; and the method of covering the limb with a bandage is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one rod from the upper tie, and another rod from the lower tie, and you loosen the flesh that is between the two ties by as much as a span, so that the bone is exposed; then cover it with a bandage, and place a linen cloth on each side, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy part, and bring the patient another wound and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if there is bleeding when you operate, cauterize the site gently, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete. Then bind the wounded member with a suitable bandage and cure it until it heals. And I will tell you what happened to a man in his sleep: he had a blackness that looked like a burn, and this corrosion started at the big toe of his foot, so that it affected the entire foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered his foot and was healed. A long time after, the corrosion returned to his finger on his hand, and he came to me, and I applied some reflective remedies after purifying the body, but he could not stop the corrosion. And he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to because I had no hope of removing the matter. And I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for his vital forces were weak. And he despaired entirely and returned home, covered his hand, and was healed. I have told this story only so that others may learn from it if they need to.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	At times an abscess forms in a fleshy spot, and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; then it erupts and pierces, and the pus escapes, leaving a hollow like a vessel; the skin above is as thin as a piece of cloth, and does not heal up to the bone or nerve; such a condition is called "sain" and not "fistula". But if it becomes so prolonged that it reaches the bone in depth, then it is called a "fistula"; and one covers this skin all around, and especially when it is thin, like a piece of cloth; and it does not heal over due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have confidence that the skin is healing and the corruption is not in depth, and the flesh is thick, then cure it with a clyster thus: look to see if the breast is swollen, and the pus within has an foul odor; then clyster it with Egyptian medicine made thus: take equal parts of alum, oil, and litarge, and put them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and as thick as honey; then take some according to your need, and dilute it in water and honey, and clyster the breast, and close the opening; leave the medicine for two hours, then express it out; do this many times until the breast is cleaned out and the foulness removed. And if Egyptian medicine is not available, then you may clyster with ashes of vine wood: take ashes from vine wood and pour water over them, then strain it and use it to clyster until you know that the breast is cleansed; and if the patient cannot bear the Egyptian medicine, or ash water, then clyster with water and honey in which there is a little litarge ground in; or you may clyster with honey and wine mixed, for the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes the sain dry up; and when you have done this and are confident that the breast is cleansed, then clyster it with something which causes flesh to form within it; take diaphoretic plaster and mix it with rose oil and wine; or you may clyster with other medicines and ointments of which I have spoken in the section on ointments. And if the opening of the breast is small, so that the clyster rod cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with an iron, and insert a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon; and if the wound is too large, then cut away only enough so that the clyster can enter; and if the pus-duct which drains the pus is above, then close it higher up, or lower down.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowels are in perfect health, one should not leave charred matter inside; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, arrange things so that the bowels move to the lowest place they can, for when the bowels are healthy, one should not leave charred matter inside, and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, arrange things so that the bowels move slightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bowels; take strengthening medicines to put over the wound, and have linen bandages covering all of the wound; then press strongly at the opening of the breast, making it a little larger than before, and apply a soothing ointment on the other bandage according to the size of the opening, and place it over the opening of the wound to ease the bowels, and do not remove the large bandage for several days; and that which is over the opening of the breast, remove often to remove the bowels, and know what comes from the bowels, whether venom, pus, or digested or undigested food; take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that rises over the wound, then know that the breast is healing, and draw closer to health; and then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you loosen the wound, change the other bandage, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast milk flows abundant and unchanged after many days, know that the breast is not drying up.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons spread over a long time, do not despair of your health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	Because there are people who have gradual healing of flesh in their wounds, and some who heal quickly; and if a wound on the breast does not heal after many days, know that the breast will not heal; and if the wound is slow to heal and is distant, then prepare dry medicines moist in substance but dry in virtue, like an ointment with diaphoretic properties, because it contains a large amount of vitriol, and this is the best medicine. Take an ointment with diaphoretic properties, and make it with rose oil, and rose wine equal in substance; then cook it and use it. And the same is done with thickened honey, when diaphoretic ointments are not available, or take myrrh, aloe, and incense, powder them, and mix with the honey as I said before, and use it. If the wound is slow to heal, and is not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is deep, and it creates an impression in the bone, or in the hard tissues, or in the soft tissues; so the treatment for a fistula wound, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panaritis is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the hand or foot, or sometimes in other places; and when it becomes infected, and no attention is paid to it, then it becomes a large abscess, and it runs and oozes pus as far as the root of the nail, and sometimes all the way to the bone; and corrosion occurs up to the bone, causing a putrid pain, and the area around the nail becomes swollen, and the color turns yellow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then you should cut away all the dead tissue remaining under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cauterization is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy; and if the nail grows into the flesh, and it starts to hurt and blister, then you should put a needle under the nail pushing the flesh up, and cut away the dead flesh gently and carefully, and apply burning and corrosive medications to remove everything; then treat the wound with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it out and draw it out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see it corrupting, cut it open at one of its ends as it has been said before, then cure it until it is healed; and if it becomes ulcerated and pus-filled, and he feels great pain, then you must heal him first; then cut the nail of the finger of the spatumile diagonally from above, and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, place something soothing on it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of a deaf hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two types of warts that grow on the hands of some people by chance are all fleshy, and by chance they have bones, and sometimes they have nails, and some grow at the root of the joint, or their origin is in one of the fingers of the hand.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in any nerve of the head does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the neck, by chance moves; the size of the one who is fleshy is slight, in such a way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; so you must keep it covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For he who is born in the nerve of the head, you must first shave the flesh around it roundly to the bone, then shave the bone with a suitable thread for that, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Joints that come together come by birth, or by wound sewing, or by burns, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Then you must cut the suture so that the nerves are restored according to their natural forms; then place between two tents or dripping wet cloths in rose oil so that they do not stick together; or place between two pieces of fine plank, until the sutures are healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If sealing occurs on either palm with the fingers, cut that stitch as needed.
des vils	of the wicked
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large wrapped vessels full of melancholy superfluities, which come to many parts of the body; and they occur more in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer an emetic to him once or twice, and then heal him with basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with fire is in two ways: one is that they are cauterized, and the black blood is drawn out; and the other way is to lift the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is done in this way: first heat the leg with very hot water until the large veins are dilated, then draw the leg from the thigh to the knee, then make an incision in one place, or two or three places, with a broad cut, then open and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient can tolerate; then ligate it and command that he eats foods causing constipation with black bile; and start the evacuation and bleeding again when the veins are full, and bind the wound.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The preparations for the patient are as follows: raise the leg of the sick person, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in the bath, and heat the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you don't have a bath, then heat it over the fire, and then press down on the vein from the top to the knee, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin at the nail, and scorch the vein on each side, so that it appears when you feel it; and you will see it red and black, and when it goes into the skin it looks like a white cord; then tie off the vein from below, so that it is raised out of the skin, and then let it go gently at the nail, then press it in another place above three times; then scorch the skin over the vein until it appears, then let it go towards the nail, as you did before; then make another incision, or several if you need to, then lift it, and press it down at the toe, then pull and lift it up to the second incision; then draw it out from incision to incision, until it is completely out, then bandage it; and if you cannot pull and raise it, then tie a strong double thread around it, and tie and pull it, and tie it under the vein, and turn your hand from side to side so that it comes out; and be careful not to burst it, because if it bursts, it cannot be pulled or raised, and it will harm the patient; and when you have treated it completely, then put soft wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound site, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the eye is constricted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one covers the eye is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cover the vein; and it is a large curve, because if it were subtle, it would cover the vein, but it must be large as we have said, and here is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is stranded in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in land where there is no moisture; and by chance it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens with the pustules that come under the skin, just as serpents and worms come inside the body, stranded between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a great inflammation comes in the leg, then the color changes, and the wound begins to come out, as well as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound opens, you should wrap around it a piece of plaster three and a half to two inches wide, and tie it, leaving the plaster hanging down on the leg, and every time some comes out from under, wrap the plaster around the leg again, and if it is too long, cut off part and wrap around what remains, but do not cover the root as long as it is all coming out; for if you cover it, it will enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and swelling in the area, because of which thing it should be treated little by little until the head, and nothing remains in the body; and sometimes this wound is as long as five or ten palms, and a man came to me once whose was twenty palms long, and when you cover it, it makes a hole or cavity, and penetrates all the way through, so that everything comes out, and the matter within is evacuated, and soothing medicines are applied to the spot for several days, and then it is cured as abscesses are.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein opens in the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself, and much pus comes out, and it drains freely; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms which grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "cow disease" in our land because it often occurs in cows, and it is caused by a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, moving throughout the body, ascending and descending, until it erupts through the skin, and it usually comes out through the eye; and it is caused by putrid humors, as with roundworms, tapeworms, and other parasites in the belly. It is feared for its malice, for when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it can enter and destroy the eye, and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and pulled, one cannot help but wait until it bleeds: therefore, you must tie the area above and below with a strong string, tie it tightly, then press on it and pull it out forcefully; and if the pus is deep in the flesh, and you do not draw it out, cauterize it with fire until it comes out; and the greatest harm it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the eye, tightly constrict under the eyelid, then press on it and pull it out forcefully; and one must use cleansing remedies for the body from soluent medicines to draw out the putrid humors, and use poultices of warming meats.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "farting" in our language, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm; and a little later, I saw it rise as quickly as a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, as bright as silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain left that spot and settled in the shoulder, and then a little later ran through the whole body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that she was spinning around the body, just as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much at how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease progress in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I have seen many whose pain moved from one place to another, but I did not see it in the woman; and I thought that it was because women have dry bodies, and their veins are exposed, and this wind is constrained to appear; and it does not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then tie it above and below tightly, and then press on it until that windiness constrained in its place issues; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it yourself, then have it treated by one who releases windiness, as with foul pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse according to their appearance and according to the part of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Their diversity is that there are some with large points, and small, and hooked, and fused; and some with two angles, and some with tongues, and some with parts; and they split in a member in two ways: either in a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls in any part of these limbs, and the sign of death that I will tell you about later appears: then you must be wary of extracting this arrow, because death comes afterward in many cases; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely embedded, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain is when the arrow pierces the bone and penetrates the brain, and there is a bleeding from the nose which is on top of the brain, and scotomata, and deafness, and blindness, and inflation, and redness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of blood; and perhaps also fluid comes out of the nose or ears; and sometimes they lose their speech and voice; and from the wound there is white moisture like pus, and also bruise-like blood; and if this sign appears to you, then cease the treatment and pull out the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of the seventh when it strikes the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were pierced by a hard object, not hollow; and sometimes the seventh becomes mute like the pulses, and expels black blood, and brings on chilliness and cold sweat, and syncope: then know without doubt that death ensues.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never leaves the lung is that there are no blisters around the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes colour, and gasps for breath and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow hits in the covering of the foot, then it is between the small ribs; and there is great swelling and pain, and gasping; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, by chance some indigestible food may jump out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow hits the belly and nothing comes out through the intestines but feces, then there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine spurts out and the patient dies, the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, spine of the back, hip, thigh, and leg, and similar members, are safe according to several arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When an arrow is in a nerve or artery and is not poisonous, as I will tell you about what happened to me, so that you can do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	A certain man had an arrow shot into his jaw at its root near the ear; I probed it and pulled it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any bleeding.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I pulled out an arrow from under the skin of the eye, below the eyelid, in a man who had been shot; and the arrow was stuck, and only its tip was visible, pointing towards the nose; the arrow was as thick as an archer’s thumb, and all its feathering was gone; the man was healed and suffered no ill effects.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears; I removed the barbs and pulled gently until I extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I extracted an arrow from a man's home that had pierced his stomach, and I thought he would die; and after thirty days passed, his condition did not improve; so I cut into the arrow, dislodged it, pulled it out, and he experienced no ill effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a person with an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound is sewn shut on top; and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions remain unchanged, and he experiences no discomfort in any of his natural acts.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And you will see another person with an arrow pierced through his face, and the wound is sewn shut; and he remains like that without suffering great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated an arrow wound in the home of the prince, the king, who had an arrow lodged in his eye, and it was slightly inclined towards the right side; and the arrow was completely lodged for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I examined it with a fine probe and felt nothing, but he felt a burning sensation under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed a soothing and digestive poultice on the site to reduce inflammation, and the location of the arrow became apparent to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice for several days, and the wound healed quickly, but the patient experienced the presence of the arrow in his eye for a long time; he himself told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open and I probed it, feeling the head of the arrow which protruded; then, with the medicine, I widened the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow appeared clearly; within four months, the wound healed well. Then, I reopened the wound, pushing in tweezers, and probing with my fingers on both sides, but it would not come out; so, I did not cease to probe and use various instruments until one day, I was able to grasp it with well-made tweezers, as will be described at the end of this chapter, and extracted it, healing the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And those who saw the patient believed that the cartilage of his nose could not be restored; so, I restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient fully recovered.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Here I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you place your treatment on what I do not say, because books cannot understand everything; but wise masters compare well with little great things, and with what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows strike the members where they are pierced in two ways: either through the place where they enter or through another part; and that which jumps out from where it enters is an arrow entering into fleshy places, and sometimes jumps out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump out right away, then leave it as long as the flesh around it becomes rotten and the exit is relieved; and similarly, if it is pierced into the bone and cannot come out, then leave it for several days, and move it every day; and then it will jump out, and if it does not, then pierce it all the way through with a very thin tool, until the opening around it becomes enlarged, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned are apparent in the patient: then do not extract it, but leave it until it is even with the skin after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the brain, this is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck in the bone at all, but only in the flesh, and does not reach the brain, and the patient remains for several days without any bad symptoms, then treat it by extracting the arrow.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is lodged deeply and cannot be removed, then administer cauterization around the wound, as I have told you; then treat the site until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged deep in the body so that you cannot see it, then probe the entire wound; and if you feel it, extract it with an appropriate instrument; but if due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, there is no bone, nerve, or vein in the way, then cut open the wound widely; and if there is a barb on the arrow preventing its removal, cut off the shaft as close to the skin as possible, then bend or twist the barb so that you can extract the arrow; be careful not to break the arrow, which would make extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot in one go, then leave it until the area around it is swollen, and then pull it out, because the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood makes it contrary, then bring about what we have said about its treatment in its chapter; and beware of incising the nerve and of opening the vein, and put the wound how you can best pull out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form that he was in when the arrow fell into him, for that is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes out from another part, or something appears from it, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it apparently: cut there, so that the tweezers can grab it, and then pull it out: let it flow out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand rapidly, as far as it goes into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, then leave it again, and then try pulling it out again until it comes out; and if the arrow is in its shaft, then insert it all the way in; and if the shaft is broken, and you see that there is room for an instrument, then insert the instrument with a hooked point, so that the tip of the arrow goes into the hook of the instrument; and then pull it out, and if the arrow is hooked, then insert the instrument with its point entering in, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, you must cut all around the flesh where the poison is, as much as you can, then cure the wound as best you can.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow pierces the buttock or thigh or belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut over it, cut out the poison; but be careful not to cut into the vein or nerve, then pull it out, and then stitch the wound, if necessary; and cure it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and you should see the shape here:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the head of an arrow is like that of a bird's feather, to push on the point of the arrow, just as this shape shows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for pushing and probing if it is there:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one can bleed, of which there are XVI in the head, namely: II batans located behind the ears, called the two 'ear-veins'; and II temples that are visible on either side; and II veins in the corners of the eyes, called 'aspires'; and the vein located in the middle of the forehead; and the vein at the tip of the nose; and the two small veins in the neck; and II veins above the lips, called 'augeherich'; and II veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the neck, and the common people call it the 'vein of the head'; and the middle one is called the 'fast' vein, and it consists of the cephalic and basilic veins, and the common people call it the 'vein of the heart'; and the basilic vein is on the right side of the neck, and the common people call it the 'vein of the belly', and it is above the fossa, and it is that one from which one bleeds, which opens clearly above the armpit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvator vein is that which is between the auricular and annular veins, and they both have two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the armpit on the left side of the neck, and the second one is at the ankle on the right side of the neck; and the vein which is called the 'nether', which is at the ankle on the other side.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of veins that are behind the ears is helped by old cathartic remedies and by blistering; and the qualities of the bloodletting instrument, as I have told you, and it is that you should press the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then constrict the patient's neck with a bandage, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending from the head; then hold them tightly with your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, prick deeply; then lift your hand all along the vein upstream, and pierce both skin and vein thoroughly with the lance, and let blood flow until you see it; then constrict and ligature it, so that it is healed; and I have already described incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries in the two temples is good for treating old migrainous headaches, and for sore eyes and habitual conjunctivitis, and for agony in the body of the eyes; and the quality of the bleeding is as I have said: and it is that the patient stretches his neck so that the two veins are clearly visible; and feel the pulse underneath your finger, and then sign with your finger; then lift the skin above the vein on your index finger, and insert the lancet underneath, and lift the vein up, and stop the bleeding as you have done in the other veins; then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their binding and their release at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding from the vein in the forehead is as good as the bleeding from the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraines and redness; and the qualities are such that the patient turns his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called 'fosseur', of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point over the vein and press gently with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and sometimes the operation is done with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too sharp; and the patient must not move about, for the bone is near, and by chance the flames might break when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins that are in the jaw helps teeth, and for tinea, and redness, and eye pain, and diseases of the face; and the qualities of their bleeding are such that the patient turns his neck by twisting some ligament, as before; then bleed him, and let the bleeding be through the cross-vein, a little from the long vein with a slightly wide flame, because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, they may break; then let blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind it with a thread, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bleeding of the vein on the nose is good for headache, and for sudden madness, and for facial diseases, such as migration and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is old; and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient tightens his neck, then squeezes his nose with his left hand, and takes a long, thin flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin to flow now; and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up for a night, for it is soon restored; and this is the way of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding of the two sinuses helps with the constriction of the throat, and with the beginning of hoarseness, and many diseases, and with impetigo, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and with ulcers; and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient tightens his neck underneath both sides, as we have said; and let the master be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient seated on a chair, then bleed the vein of the long one fairly widely, then draw the blood gently, or as much as is needed; then do the same in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and squeeze both veins gently so that the patient does not choke; and let it be until morning, so that the wound can heal.
de la sainie des leivres	of bleeding from the gums
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	Bleeding from the veins of the lips helps with sores in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and pain in the teeth and gums.Si li sainie des leivres soit par tuit li corps, si convient qu’on l’estreigne a la fin; car il adont a meins et a membrains.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of bleeding are to have the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which can be recognized by their being black, and by there being small black veins around them: press both of these, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, press the thickest vein on each side, and similarly do the same with the two above and below, for it is a similar process.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of bleeding under the tongue:
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Bleeding from the veins under the tongue helps after bleeding from the head, and it aids in constrictions of the throat, and in diseases of the throat, and of the mouth; and the qualities of the bleeder are that the patient should sit between your hands facing the sun, and stick out his tongue, and look underneath on each side for a black vein: press both of these, and do not go too deep, because arteries are underneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck from which one usually bleeds are healed in two ways: either by pricking with a wide flame-hot needle, or with an olivary needle as thin as a vein trenchant, and is called 'anesil'; and they are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is very famous, and it is broad as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the flat veins of the head that contain gross and troubled blood, with a wide flame-hot needle. And this is the shape of the olivary needle:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and subtle, and it is used for bleeding the subtle veins where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilic vein, which is one of these veins, aids in maladies that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and the bleeder must bleed freely, and be careful not to pierce the artery beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he pierces the artery, and there is a gushing of blood, then he must stop it, as I have said; and the needle must not be flame-hot, but tailed like an anesil.Et li auter sainie dou col est la zavaque, qui va desuz li menton si com le fraiz dou sainor qu’il saine li voinne dou col; et covient qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desuz.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basil does not open obviously, then you must stretch it, and change to another; or you want some from him, or heal in his place the vein in the arm: it opens obviously; and the flame copes silence, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the place of bleeding, then you must stretch the arm so that you feel the pulse; then sign the place inside, and then tie the arm, and stop the vein with the flame silent; and beware that you do not harm the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rising up as high as urine in a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: hurry then, and put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens; tie the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move it until it is healed. And let him be in fear, and do not move it until he is cured.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not staunched and he bleeds out and there are no medicines available, cut into the artery to stop the flow of blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of bark from the root of a fig tree, and split it, and take one half and bind it tightly until the next day; if the bleeding has stopped then that is good; if not, then treat it with a styptic powder as we have said, to stop the flow of blood. Stypic powders are not harmful for most conditions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The wound in the middle if it helps to draw out blood from the head and body above it, because it is composed of basil and cephalic, as we have said; and the surgeon must be careful of the nerve underneath, not to cut too deeply, and to find the nerve, which may become inflamed and damaged beyond repair; and this nerve often opens up in some men due to its subtlety, and if it does not open at all in others, then you must treat it with an instrument made for this purpose; and explore the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between the two nerves, they will make an incision there.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The sinus of the cephalic [vein] if it aids, draws blood from the head, and aids the eyes; and one should bleed with a flame of olive or myrrh, for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, one should seek the lightest place, and not worry if one fails the first time, and one should try again; and by chance, the places inflame some men, when one fails the first time, but it does no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bleeding depends on your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is not done only to cure diseases but also to prevent them; and bleeding should be done in one of the three veins: the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of lent, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent; and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The medicine that is administered to the sick has no fixed time, but when there is a need during the day or night, at all times and in all seasons; and children should not be bled until they are fourteen years old, nor should women who are pregnant more than seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the elderly over 60 years old be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever manner, they should cleanse the intestines with a mild enema if they have much retained stool, so that the veins do not attract harmful excess fluids from the intestines to the principal limbs; one should not bleed those who are very full from food, or those who are drunk, until they have sobered up, nor the very elderly; and if someone is bled after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, or excessive sexual activity with a woman, and from hard work, watching all night, fasting, or exertion of any kind, and whatever weakens the body through illness or injury; then subtly draw off the humors, if the blood is thick, through food and drink and medicine, if you have the skill; then enter the bath, if nothing else can open up the veins to let out the blood, in order to cleanse it, and bleed from the vein on the ankle just below the ankle bone, as we have said; and guard against exertion that day, and sexual intercourse, and similar activities; and be calm and cheerful, and have the bleeder stand higher than the person being bled, and rub their arm two or three times to make the veins swell and become visible; then moisten the blade of the bleeding instrument with a little old oil, and place the tip of their left thumb over the vein where they want to bleed, so that the vein does not slip away from the blade.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flow like cords to the heart, and some that are filled with winds, so that when one applies fire, it retreats from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these; and if the vein opens, the wound is too narrow, therefore the surgeon must be cautious in such cases.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is working for the first time, it is good; if not, try again a little lower down or higher up, if the area is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the part is swollen and the patient is in doubt, leave it for one or two days without binding the arm; perhaps hot abscesses will form; do not enter the bath then, but start the bleeding again if she wishes; and if the opening is small, cut the vein short and gently, and you doubt that it will not let out as much blood as you wish, then apply the flame directly to that small opening; and work gently, so that the part may be swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the area swollen, do not re-open the wound, and place a poultice of lard on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the lard that is in the oil; and thus administer the lard of oil in every wound that you open veins to stop the flow of blood; and it also makes a triaicle and bowels of them when placed on the area; and it disperses the blood subtlely when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not bled before and the opening of the vein is small, hurry and place a sponge soaked in warm water on the area and bind it for an hour; and you should do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if it remains in the area after a few days, some blackness or greeness appears, it does no harm; and if you see anything, place some aloe or myrrh made into a poultice, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and appearance at the opening of the basilic vein: put your hand over it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So be sure not to put anything on it from what we have said, for it might cut into an artery; but make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its quantity and the nature of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thinned out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for those who are full and swollen, and need bloodletting, that one makes them a larger wound, and the fleams must be wide; and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should be bled little and often, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not puncturing; and this method of bleeding is safe from blood flow and nerve damage, and is better than bleeding from a long or wide cut.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for those whose body needs bleeding, one should give them moist bread in pomegranate juice; if they are hot-tempered, they should eat it three or four times before bleeding. And if of a cold complexion, they should eat moist bread in muscat syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and nuts, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during bleeding, after a large amount of blood has been lost, he should drink broths and subtle fragrant syrups, and use the other remedies we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope, for the opening of the veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by significant bleeding, that he bleeds a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to open their arm after the first bleeding, and they have a strong body, then heal for .7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to bleed elsewhere, then they should bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is a lot of blood inside the body that has been heated and causes fever; therefore, you must draw off a large quantity and widen the opening so that it drips out gently; then you should check all the conditions for bleeding, and place your hand on his pulse as he bleeds, so that death does not come to him through the vein, and this often happens when the surgeon is negligent; and you must not press hard on the vein when you see the arm being released and bleeding again, and the opening is closed; nor if it is crooked, should you straighten the arm suddenly, for that would be harmful; but let it be until it bleeds a second time. Then you can apply the fire to the tip, so that the frozen blood inside the vein melts and drips out, and place a little warm water on it, pressing gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not constrict it at all, until the abscess has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.Et se li sang est rouge, si est bon signe; et s’il est sanz couleur, si est mal signe.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are bled in the place of the vein in the head because it is composite.Et li voinne emmi le bras et le chief sont sainie en leu de la veine emmi la face.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of bleeding is that the patient places his hand in hot water until the vein turns red; then tie it loosely so that the vein appears well, then bleed now from the middle, not from the broad or long vein; and let the incision be wide, and let the bleeding be close to the joint of the hand, and if none can come out, put the hand back in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is in winter, do not return the hand to hot water, because we put it in there more in winter than in summer; and bleeding from this vein is safer than from any other vein because there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Bleeding from the vein on the little finger of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done: straighten the hand, put in hot water until the vein swells, so that one can see it; and if you bleed from the middle, and if you cut it from top to bottom, it will not hurt; and do not go too deep, because the nerves are completely naked under the skin; then put the hand back in hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as necessary, then place oil and silk on the vein to heal quickly, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the right side, and do everything as I have told you for the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the sophia is good for all diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the chest, and retention of fluids, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its salve are such that the patient should soak their feet in hot water, and rub the salve on the vein until it disappears, and apply it above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and up the foot, they should apply it to the largest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you treat it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and treat it across as well by cupping; and let the flames be anaesthetized.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the poison cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the salve does not work the first time, they should try again the second day, for the area is salty; and do not worry about nerves, as we have said, and similarly make the sophia salve for the other foot in the same way.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its remedy is worth the pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its healing is such that the patient enters the bath, and twists his ankle three times, for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then heal it in every way you can, and by crossing over; and it is better that you cover it, for the part is safe, and it is very relaxing for many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not believe this, then heal a vein on his back which opens towards the small toe, and guard against the nerves; and make the blood flow as much as you can see, and then loosen the bandage and place cotton on it and tie it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Of cupping treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made from horns, or copper, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is done by burning is done in two ways: with fire or without; and the cupping that is done by burning and by bloodletting is performed at 14 places on the body, one of which is on top of the head; and another on the neck; and two more on either side of the neck; and one under the chin; and one on each shoulder; and one on each hip; and one on each thigh; and one on each ankle; and the cupping does not draw blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this it does not weaken at all, as is done with bloodletting; and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor without, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of sickness it is needed to bleed, or because of habit, we should do so every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and throughout the entire year; for there are those who, when they need to bleed, become heavy-headed; and there are those who experience puffiness and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes; and some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue swells, and they taste blood; and there are those who faint, and see blackness and horror and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is during the moon month, we command them to fast after the third hour of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with headaches ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of the whole body; and this venting is in place of the bleeding of the head, and it should not be used by those of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, for it does them great harm; and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases in their heads.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal from it become oblate, and because of this, the cupping glass should be placed a little lower to guard against oblateness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the neck is in the place of the artery of the head and the basilic vein, and because of this it helps with swelling in the feet, and with fissures in the ducts of the lungs, and with cough and with repletion; and one should not push on it too much, for if it is pressed too hard, it can cause obstruction in the gullet or stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilations in the two collar bones of the neck help with headaches and eye pain and migraines, and with strangulation and toothache, and are in the place of the artery of the basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand when placing it, so that he does not compress the artery and cause a gushing of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Wind beneath the chin causes disease in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar diseases which affect the mouth; it occurs at the point where the two lips meet.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Wind at the shoulders causes a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilations in the armpits are like three veins in the arm, for they attract blood from these large veins; and instruct the surgeon not to push too deep, for under the skin there are nerves and arteries.Li ventosations as coutes si valent as voinnes dou poing, et as nervs qui vont a la main, et covient que li sainor les ventile, car il adest souvent que ilz sont estraintes et dolors; si li sainor veult ventiler li ners desom, qu’il le fies desoz le peele de la main.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass placed on the back is effective for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath; and it should be large and made of brass, so that it can effectively draw out fluids; and in some cases, if it is too small, it may break and cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg cupping-glasses heal openly, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains in the joints, and of the muscles, and of the bladder, and they realign the bones; and they are placed on the two thighs, and on the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after a long time, and bring on fainting in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping-glass is that you first place it empty, and suck gently, and place it quickly, and move evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the area red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears; then stop, and replace the cupping-glasses, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have such thin skin and small pores: so one should only strike once, and make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to sottily open the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw blood a little at a time, we only need to strike once.Et se li sans est clers et legiers, si covient ferir .iiij. fois soulement: la premiere fois si est por subtiliier la voie dou sang, et les autrs si son por sucer.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	If we want to draw a lot of blood, we should leech often; and if the blood is thick, we should pierce with a needle, and the spots where the needles enter should be such that the heart is suddenly pierced, and it suits those who have tough, hard skin and narrow pores that you anoint the places on the leeches with aperitif and dissolving oils: if it is in the winter, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in summer, with watercress oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of aniseed, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if they to whom one bleeds have soft skin and wide pores, then no oil should be put on them, but they should be washed after bleeding with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those who have a lot of moisture, it helps to rise with garlic, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities are raised by old wine, or by water of succus, or by the infusion of fennel or chamomile, or other similars; and one should not bleed with a cupping-glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after venting the wind, and it is necessary that he warm himself when he is to be bled and when he has been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware if the person who is bleeding is choleric, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed; then one should eat cool things, like pomegranates and endives and lettuce with garlic, and similar things; and small amounts of porridge, and milk, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cool complexion should drink honey syrup, and moderately old wine, which is between old and new, and eat porridge, and small amounts of porridge and peas and small birds; and on the day that one bleeds, one should drink more than eat; and it is good to give some men theriac or musk before bleeding, or afterwards, to strengthen the main organs; and dilute the blood, but one should not drink this who are hot-tempered.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are placed without causing harm are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the gout, and on the belly, and the armpit, and the ribs, and the hip; for these members do not endure being hurt upon the eyes, and it is only done in order to draw blood from one member to another, as we place them on the breasts when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscousness that is in the member, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and armpit to reduce the member; and it removes pain when there is inflammation or a stone, and by its attractive power perhaps draws out the inflammation, or the stone deserts its place; and thus does it act when it is placed on the liver and on the mumps when there is retained windiness, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the fire-cupping instrument is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it is two inches wide and half a palm deep, and on the sides around the middle there is a small hole, just big enough to push through a needle, and it should be made of brass, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there is a crossbar of brass or iron, to hold a candle, and they are both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who use them; for the ventouses of children are different from those of the elderly, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And you should place this ventouse on the limb thus: take the candle of wax or the linen and put it inside the ventouse through the bar in the middle, so that the flame is at the bottom of the ventouse and does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, and hold your fingers over the hole we mentioned, so that when you wish, the vapors will go, and you remove the ventouse; then take the linen as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	Therefore in the cupping-glass which is administered for pleurisy, in all acute diseases, there is no tube or opening, and it is not removed until it is full of water, and it is placed on the limb only; and that is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leeches are not removed until they are in the soft water, without any porridge, and it is not administered unless there is room for a cupping-glass because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in naked flesh, such as fingers or nose, and others like them; and the quality of their use is that when you find leeches that are in soft clean water without any porridge, take them; and put them into fresh water for as long as they become familiar, so that there is nothing in their stomachs; and then let him be bled from a vein and with a cupping-glass, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place leeches on top of it; and when they are full, and bleed, if there is a place where a cupping-glass can be placed, let them do so, for it does much good.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, he raises the vein with ash and then water, then squeezes it; and if the vein heals too close to the body of the leech, he soaks a linen cloth in cold water and places it on top until the leech is suffocated; and if the bleeding increases, he applies ground vitriol, or galena, and similar substances, until it is stopped; or he places half a handful of peeled beans on the vein, and leaves them until they warm the spot, which will then stop the bleeding; and if he needs more, he takes other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the leeches will not attach, he rubs the bleeding spot with fresh blood, or he inserts a needle so that the blood flows out, and then applies them; and as soon as they taste the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they defecate, he puts on a poultice of powdered aloes and salt, or ash, and they will soon stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is a cure for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish people are talking about this chapter, which they have never seen in any of the ancient books, nor have they read any letter; and for this reason, science is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones; and I know nothing about it, except through the science of the ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have acquired knowledge, and through experimentation and the habit of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the subjects of the discussion and the chapters where the sage places his understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing occurs in someone, you must hurry to heal the patient from both sides, if nothing else holds him back, such as weakness of the body, or youth, or old age; and if the weather is not very warm, or too cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cool joints, and bird and deer meat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill himself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess, or of a spreading matter in the limb; then return the patient to his former lifestyle.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, one should feed the patient foods that promote swelling and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, feet, and belly of a cow, offal, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because with this swelling, the bones will be held together and heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well set or joined according to their nature because of the dryness of the members, nor those which are also too tender, such as the bones of small children; but have no concern about it, reset the broken bone with the large tendons that stretch and join the member together, so that it is forced into its former position; and do not stop at all in his work, and for this reason one should eat plenty of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you should know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot, or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in piercing, just as in the cutting of a quill for writing.Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, then there is a break all over, like a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each bone has its own nature and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes into its place; and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the joint is twisted, and it appears clearly by feeling, and sounds when pressed with the hand; and when there is no twisting or feeling, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture; but there may still be a twist, or a split, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it by hand, but apply remedies that follow, and then hold it firmly yet gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which goes in the bone, and are the two parts separated, they should now be put back together evenly, so that the abscesses heal; and if the abscesses are hot, let them rest for a day, so that the abscesses can settle; then put it back into alignment as easily and gently as you can, and know that the restoration of the bone is easier than the restoration of the one with pieces; then hold it tight, as it should be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces of bone, if it is in two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or your hand, if it is a small member, or with two tendons, or one tendon and your hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, you bring them back together with all your strength, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient; and fit the two heads of the bone well according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And you can feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not in the right place; then dress it nicely, and do not pull on it too much or press as those who bring about hot abscesses and contraction in the limb by their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is at rest, the patient must be instructed to keep it still, whether waking or sleeping, turning or otherwise; and he must ensure that the limb is so secure that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, he is not at rest, and you must put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and you must ensure that he is straightened out so that no crookedness comes to him as he is restored; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and hands and the like: these must be wrapped with soft, fine linen; and for larger ones, such as thighs and legs, use a wide, sturdy bandage, for wide bandages embrace the entire large limb and constrict it evenly all around, so that there is no swelling; then wrap lightweight bandages three or four times around the broken limb, according to its size, and tighten your hand slightly on the bandage as you go, then go over the break and ease up on the pressure, so that the break moves away slightly; then soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it around the broken area again; then go back to the part below the break and constrict it gently, not too tightly or too loosely, as we have said in the first hour above; then place pieces of linen or bandages between the bandages so that they are all even, then tie everything tightly with a bandage on top, and then put your splints on well, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something warm upon the abscess to soothe it and reduce the swelling, and leave it thus for several days; then bind it tightly with bandages, and let them be of half a large cane, or of wood used for making clubs, or of palm fronds, and let them be in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the bandage that one places upon the dislocation should be a little larger and broader than the others; and it should be as long as the limb is small or large; then tighten over the bandages as you did at first, then tie a thread over them accordingly, as in the first instance on the dislocation; the tighter underneath, the less above; and the thread must be fine, not too thick nor too thin, and it should be of soft linen; for if the thread is thick, as I have seen fools do, making their ligatures from twisted cords, and this is a great mistake, for the ligature cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it should not be more than two fingers' width between each bandage.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is nervous from the cold of the stars after their constriction in a healthy manner, then place beneath them pieces of linen or other soft material so that they are not hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment for this below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should know that one must not dislocate all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Because when the member is swollen, you should not put splints on it until after five or seven days, or more depending on the heat of the abscess; and here is the manner of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that is kept on the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common way of the plaster restoring the fracture in various conditions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plaster restoring fractures, dislocations and twists: take three parts of bark of willow, and alder, and elecampane, and asafetida, and gum arabic, each weighing 10 grains; myrrh and aloe, each weighing 5 grains; and alchangel, weighing 8 grains; and grind them into powder, and mix with egg white. If the person's complexion is warm, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plaster that is good for torsion: take mastic and balms, each 10; myrrh and aloes, each 9; wax 6; Armenian bole 10, and grind well, and mix with water or an abundance of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of plaster for joints and bones displaced from their places, and to soothe the resulting pain, and to treat the fracture: take new linen, and moisten it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess and removing pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and leaves of the earth pebble, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of a bone fracture and to reduce an abscess: take new linen, and moisten it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of marshmallow, chamomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, one part each; grind them and cook in wine. If the member is inflamed, cook it in moist coriander water or water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another more powerful method of plaster, for when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.Take equal parts of the roots of marshmallow, camomile, and violet, and grind them with vinegar; cook in wine until thick. If the member is inflamed, cook it in moist coriander water or water, and apply it.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of comfrey, and the seed of flax, buckthorn, milk thistle, and yellow oxeye daisy, and the flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part; and grind them up, and cook with water or salt water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocrites says in his book that one should not put on the broken member for restoration other than a cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else; it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen says one must put on the broken member, to restore, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of making an ointment that helps with injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair cut short, or bird feathers, and bee's wax, and mix them together, and crush them, and make an ointment from it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after that, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone moved from its place; if not, loosen it with your fingers for several days. And if pain comes to the area, or itching, without rest or swelling, hurry up and loosen it, and remove the ointment immediately; and take a light cloth, and sponge of sea water moistened in water, and apply it to the area until the itching stops and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then place upon it a layer of dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it up on a nut, until you are sure there is no hot abscess; and let the inflammation of the member subside, and the pain be removed, then begin again with gentle massage, and a little ointment, and do not pull as hard as before; and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and binding, then restart it, just as you did at first.Et se il adonque s’en va par fin et est sainz, si mettous embaumeure de l’esguileure, si com tu as mist premierement; et se il a duré longuement et qu’il soit osté, si mist li embaumeure et li lien, si com tu as mist premierement.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If the limb does not show any of the signs we have mentioned, do not try to set it for three, four, or five days; sometimes even twenty days, depending on what one observes, until the fracture heals and the bone draws closer to the skin above; then restrain it more tightly than before, and increase its bulk as I have already said. If you see that the area is drying out more than it should, know that swelling cannot occur there; therefore, soak it with warm water every time you loosen it, and do this every third day, while reducing the pressure slightly; through this practice, swelling comes to the limb, and quickly heals what the foolish healers do, who straighten limbs but harm them: this is wrong, and their methods are feeble, and I see nothing good that comes of laxity or doing it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures, with different shapes and distinct causes. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a sword, breaking the bone all the way to the socket located under the bone, as happens with an axe or a club. This type of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts into the bone without breaking it, and this type of break is called 'absolute'; and the wound from these two breaks is large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an impact with force, or splitting, or from the collar bone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a fracture piercing to the membrane under the bone, or on top of it, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that is lodged in the bone as thin as a hair, and the crack is small, then this type of fracture is called "capillary". If the wound is made by stone, or by falling, or by similar objects, and pushes the bone fragment inside, and the site is chiseled like the way blacksmiths work on kettles; then it is called a "stone fracture".
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	This happens more often to those with moist bones in the head, like children's skulls; and it occurs in all types of fractures when small fragments are dispersed like pebbles, and I will speak about this in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all types of fractures by examining them closely, and through interrogation while the patient is stretched out, and by the discolored skin that appears above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary resemblance is known when, after exposing the bone and rubbing it gently, a black Bruch appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be aware of any bad symptoms, and if you see no evil signs such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsion, paralysis, fever, eyes popping out and reddening, and other similar things in various conditions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no terrible accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the new-born comes to you first, and it is winter, you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the spring, you should hurry to remove the foreskin before the seventh day, otherwise, the tissue under the foreskin will be corrupted and the accidents we have described will occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone extends just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the fractured part thus: and you must grasp the head of the injured person, and expose the bone in every way you can, and over the wound more gently than you can; and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or a suppurating abscess, treat it with what is appropriate. Then fill the site with moistened fabrics in rose oil; let the wound rest until the suppurating abscesses are soothed, and ensure there is no further bleeding. Then begin to remove around the bone, and this can be done in two ways: one way is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have various cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they are pointed and made of iron; and work lightly so that you do not bleed the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce it all around, so that you administer cauteries with a chisel, not so deep that they penetrate beyond the bone of the chest, and it should have a rim or .i. circle above the tip, which does not allow the tip to pass beyond the bone; and you should have several, so that each one comes in its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have chisels for all tests; and this is the form of the .iij. ways of chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the bone are that you put 1 chisel on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the chisel somewhere else a little later, and do this all around, then cut into the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this most subtly and lightly, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone to your hand, or with one of the instruments that you have, such as tweezers, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it is appropriate to remove any roughness that remains on the bone with another instrument resembling an incision tool, but it should be thinner and more delicate than other incision tools; if any small bones or scales remain, remove them gently with the instrument. Then dress the wound as we have described, with bandages and ointments.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer; he praises it highly, and his word is final.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must expose a part of the bone where the open fracture is located; once you have exposed that area, place under the edge of this lenticular incisor, from which the shape of the instrument comes.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is ağe on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then hit with a small mallet above, so that you gently tap the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane that is underneath; if it adheres to the bone, loosen it gently, for the bone can be loosened without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on the surface, and there are small pieces, then one must smooth that roughness, and remove the scales with a subtle razor, of which you should have several quantities, in order to use the most suitable one according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Take first a large razor, and then a more subtle one, and do not cease doing this until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and subtle fractures, one must prepare the wound according to its nature; and this is not a matter that can be entrusted to someone who has not dedicated themselves to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is exposed, you should take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another piece of linen doubled in two or three layers, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it over the first piece of linen; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not burden the wound, then administer another bandage above, and do not tighten it more than is necessary to hold the wound; and leave it like this for a day or two, until the abscesses are relieved, then loosen it, and apply remedies such as lili roots, and flour of beans, and incense powder, and aristologus, and similar things; and from these ingredients make a powder, and place it over the wound, and administer more remedies that do not cause biting; and ensure that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, or allow any pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the membrane of the brain, it hardens and causes great harm; for when one applies something biting over the wound, it causes it to harden from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care that no evil accident comes to the patient, as we have said, for it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness does not come but only due to the medicine that has been applied, because such virtue it has, then you should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and glue a cloth with it, and place it over the syphilis; then treat it in ways that are appropriate until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You should know that sometimes the two parts of the jaw are broken, one by itself, because they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is pushed or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should boil your little finger or thumb, and place the equal break inside your index finger, and the foreskin over it, until the nail grows back according to its natural shape; and do this gently, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is on top of the nail and the fingers cannot reach the spot, then you should put it in the same way at the end of a thin rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, then do this in the same way, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the wound is healed, then boil a tent of linen cloth around the finger where the break is.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you attach another to another part, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the nails.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must wet the bandages with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that is good, but one should wet the bandages with egg white and flour; then leave the bandage until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one attaches goose feathers instead of tents, and wraps a cloth around it, and holds the fracture in place, and the patient blows among it; then do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if a hot abscess comes in the nose while you are operating on it, then put cerate or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in a little diaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no abscess, then apply a poultice made from flour of sorrel, and incense powder, cooked in egg white, then place light dressings on top, but do not tie the nipple; and if the fracture of the nipple is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract it with suitable instruments, then stitch the wound, and treat it with healing substances, and bind it up, as with poultices and ointments suitable for this purpose; and if there is no wound inside the nipple, then treat it with bandages, and apply splints of soft wood, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated underneath, and there is no external wound, and the joint is only slightly displaced, without being broken in two, they know it easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the dislocation is on the right side, you should put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the dislocation is on the left side of the jaw, then put your index finger from your right hand, and gently push the joint back into place, and hold it steady with your other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the dislocation of the jaw is displaced in , you should administer an extension of , so that it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement in the teeth, or looseness, then hold them with a gold or silver or silk thread; and put cerate on the broken jaw, and put on a double cloth; and put on top of the cloth a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather the same size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it on as tightly as possible, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the face changes, then loosen it after three days and then reset what has changed; and put an ointment on top of the powder from the mill with abundant egg yolk or flour of sisament, after removing the cerate; and put a thin linen cloth on top of the ointment, and if the ointments become hot, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it takes to heal; often it is healed within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if painful abscesses come, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone is dislodged; then remove it skillfully with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains nothing inside, then stitch up the wound, if it is large, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing as long as necessary.
de la forcele	of the armpit:
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The armpit dislocates in several ways forward towards the shoulder, and there are three types of dislocation: it can be broken and separated into two pieces, which is the easiest to treat; or it can be broken with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when the fracture is without wound, that you have .ij. ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which feels the broken bone; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then place the break evenly in your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no appearance or displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to stretch further, place under the shoulder of the patient a round pillow of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your need; then raise and lower the bone, and press the pillow against your hand, so that you place the break evenly, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the bone out of joint because it comes in too deeply, then the patient should lie on his back, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and the ministers press the shoulder upwards, until the bone is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then press the break with your hands, and if you find it splintered, you should split it; and draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any protrusion, then cut one of the incisions that you have made deeper, but place this instrument under the bone to guard against the sinew:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and resembles a spoon, and is not hairy, and is as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has two heads, as you can see, and one is wide, and the other is narrow, as is the edge of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the edge is small, or if you doubt a hot abscess, cover the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, soak 1 bandage in rose oil and in garlic and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The dislocation of the bone, when there is no wound or cut, is to put on the bone the poultice of mill powder and egg white, and place light sponges on top, and if necessary, place a spike under the splint; then take a very large band one palm wide, then place a double draping over the sponges and the poultice; then take a thin strap three fingers wide and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs loose; and place the strap over the fracture, and wind the bandage over the collarbone and under the healthy shoulder blade, and under the affected shoulder blade; and adjust it from each side, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture in place, and you clearly see that the strap is not moving over the broken bone, then remove it every day, and when the ligature loosens, apply a restraint; and let the patient lie on his back, and while he sleeps, place a small pillow under the shoulder blade to raise the shoulder; thus the dislocation of the collarbone will be healed by the stretching of the shoulder, or you may bind the arm to the neck for up to 28 days if no bad accident happens; then start the poultice again if you see that it is needed, and stretch and leave it as such until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Then the shoulder may be broken or widely displaced without causing pain to the patient except through touch; one should set the fracture according to its shape and realign it in every way possible; then apply a powder of eggshell with egg white, and light poultices, and place a double drape over it; then put on a broad and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there is any hair underneath the shoulder, use a cloth of linen poultice so that the splint lies evenly; then tightly bind it with a large bandage, so that the splint does not move from its position, and check the bandage each day; and every time it loosens, tighten it again, and adjust the splint if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; the shoulder will be healed in 20 to 25 days. And when this time is up, remove the bandages, for it is not a bone that can be easily set right again.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out in front, and not under the heart, cut it away and do what we have said about the dislocation of the shoulder to soothe the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the dislocation of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The nose is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks at the bridge.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks breath, and feels faint, and perhaps vomits blood, and the brain shows through the broken bone, and he feels very ill.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to have the patient lie on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders, then press their shoulders, and bring together the ribs on both sides with your hands, and carefully adjust them so that the bones are in the correct position; then apply poultices and bandages made from the subtle salt, or another light substance, and wrap it up in a cloth, and tie it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; then turn the leg gently to the side, and bind it firmly but comfortably, and check every hour if it has softened, and if it has, bind it more tightly; and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain or an abscess, then do so quickly, and loosen the bandage, and clean away any pus that has formed, and apply remedies to treat the area; then reapply the poultice, and bind it up tightly until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the broken ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in the large ribs near the back, and in the chest area, and they only bend due to their being slippery; and it feels good when pressed on both sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the ointment, and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.Et si li estele ne tenet pas, si covient que tu le baisies de vives coles, si com il convient, et met l’estelle sus, et ainsi le laisses.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is declined inward, the patient feels great pain and puncturing, as with pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; and he also has pain in his arms and chest and vomits a large amount of blood, and this is a serious condition, and the ancients have given it great importance.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that bloat the belly in order to push the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not believe that hot abscesses will come, unless they have already come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if he has come, then heal him.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should place cupping glasses over the area to draw out fluids, and that this is sensible advice; nevertheless, there is a doubt that the cupping glass might attract excess fluids to the site due to the weakness of the patient.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one must cover the area with moist woolen cloth in hot oil, and place tenting between the ribs to apply pressure evenly all around; then it should be bandaged with a pleurisy poultice made of meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure through the bone which points to the webbing, and there is doubt in the patient, then one should split above the location of the broken rib, and one must place an instrument underneath to push out the pleura; and then one must chip away at the bone, and gently pull, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses arise, one should place wet rags in rose oil and apply them to the area; and treat the location where the abscess is needed, and let the patient lie carefully on his side where it is, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a fracture of the bones of the neck, and it sometimes bends; and also of the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if you see his hands become soft, swollen, and dead-feeling, and he cannot move or extend them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	You know that they are deadly in many dispositions, and if they move and feel good when one pulls and pinches them, you know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the ailment is healed, if one applies a cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then take note if the feet are numb, and if the sensations are in the arms and on the back there are twitches and flatulence without will; and when one presses on his belly, there is flatulence without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is pressed on his back and he wants to sit up, he cannot.And if it happens that he cannot move one of his limbs, or both, and you see that he cannot move his arms or legs, or one side more than the other, then know that this is a bad sign.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	You know it is deadly if there is no progress in his healing.And if he has a fever for many days and nights, and does not want to drink or eat anything, but only wants to sleep, then know that this is a bad sign.Saiches qu’il est mortelz: car il ne vuit boire ne manger.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to them, then the thing is much easier.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is a hot abscess, then the physician should put rose oil or chicken egg white on the spine until it is soothed, then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters and bind it with a bandage; and he must command the patient to rest and not sleep on the painful side until it heals.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is exposed, then it must be covered with a cloth; and remove the bone, then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, then the physician should apply ointment around the wound, until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the 'head of the shoulder', squeeze your left testicle in your left hand, and the right one in your right hand as much as you can, then apply the plaster and bandage, if necessary; then hold it tight, and if there is an exposed bone, cover it, remove it, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break in the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Then the bones of the hip may be broken, and if so, there will also be a little lessening in the head; they are long and sloping towards the buttocks, and the patient feels pain and piercing in the affected area, and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the fracture so that you are on the break; and you know where the fracture is and what its shape is; and if the fracture is only in the head, then put it back into place so that it is restored to its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it slopes downward, then let the patient lie on his stomach so that the restoration of this fracture may be prepared for.Et se il decline ou pardeins, si fai gesir sur son dos, et tant li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie; car ele ne doit pas decliner a l’un cotez ne au chief.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it back into place, then apply the plaster, and then put on a splint of wood or horn, and bind the fracture so that it does not move; and press on the area under the ribs so that the clavicle is restored.Et si le malaide ne peut demorer sou la estele, si met le sur une table ou un leu plan, et tant li restoration soit aparillie.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if pus-filled blisters appear, do not touch them until the pus-filled blisters have drained and dry up, and then apply what we have said before; and then return to the healing process, and bind it as it should be, if there is no bad outcome; and that is how it's done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoire is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods: one method is that you take a stick, smooth and straight, according to this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And take two chairs, and lean them against each other, and seat the patient on one chair; then let him stretch his broken arm out over the top of the chair, so that it hangs down, and place a cushion under his hand; then lean him back against something heavy or have someone hold him upright; then place the mirror so that the break aligns with his hands, so that the bone returns to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	Another method is to have the patient lean back against his heel, and tie his hand to his neck; then instruct two ministers, one to hold what is above the break in place with their hands, and the other to hold under the elbow, and each to stretch their respective parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more severe, then pull the ligament beneath the fracture and above it, and stretch each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then you should put the ligament under the socket and the other towards the neck, under the fracture; and likewise, if the fracture is towards the neck, then it is necessary to put the ligament lightly and without labor, so that the fracture is even on its place, and on the neck; then put the fracture evenly as it should be, and hold it, if no abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess forms, do not tighten it for seven days, and put cool linen in vinegar and rose oil over the abscess until it is soothed; then tighten it, and the method of tightening is that you put the plaster over the break, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and lay a cloth and tighten over the shoulder and arm so that the arm is straight, without anything bending it or the bone moving.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use pins and place a pin larger and stronger than the others on the fracture, with .1 inch of space between each pin, and let each pin be large enough to project .3 inches beyond the fracture on either side; then pull on the pins, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, strongly and without moving them too far.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the settlement of the stars, and the binding, as we have said, at the time that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it to ligature until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at the ligament every three days so that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or the nutrients cannot come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you follow these instructions, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if such accidents do not occur, and the dislocation does not return until after three days or more, let the patient sleep on his back, and keep his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder a cushion filled with wool, equally thick all around, and every hour of the day and night, see that the figure of the broken member does not move, nor the ligaments soften; then he will be adjusted by medicine, and given the food we have previously mentioned, so that the food is in the first subtle state; and when he begins to recover, let him eat solid food.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be adjusted within 40 days of the injury; then they should be reset, and baths and ointments administered to adjust the joint.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is bad and obstructed, it will remain unhealed for 1 or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the elbow
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of 2 bones, which are called the 'ulna', one of which is small and sits below the armpit; and the other is larger and sits below the little finger. Sometimes only the larger ulna breaks, or the smaller one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, their restoration and healing is easier; but when the large bones are broken, healing is more difficult and takes longer than when they are broken all at once.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bone that is broken, then one should gently extend and align it.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone that is broken, then one should apply more force in extending it; and lay him on his back, with his affected arm raised higher than the rest of his limbs, and his small fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross his legs over himself, and a pillow under his head to elevate it, so that the patient does not experience any discomfort; then one minister should extend the affected arm upwards towards the hand, and another minister upwards towards the elbow.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts the mirrors equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are pieces in the fracture, put each one in its place, and if none are out of place that press the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before, on the chest and the bone.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a particular chapter; so take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, then glue a bandage of cerate made of rose oil and white wax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind the bandage subtly over them, until the hot abscesses are eased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerate, and apply the plaster of flour from the mill with an egg white, then put on the bandages, and let the bandage over the fracture be stronger, and a little larger than the others; and know that there should be 6 bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two; and press harder on the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as time goes on, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread by which it is bound be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reexamine the limb and the joint after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching coming to the limb, then you should wash the limb with hot water until the itch is relieved; and let the limb not be pressed or restrained while resting.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then restart the stretching, and if the joints are relaxed and the bones are dislocated, or anything similar, then adjust it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you are unable to bring the nutrients to the member because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little bit, and leave it like that for a few days, until the nutrients flow, and then stretch it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have mentioned happen to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or if he feels pain in his neck and shoulders, then he should sleep on his back with his neck aligned, and guard against movement and convulsion; and know that this fracture will be healed within 30 or 35 days, or perhaps within 20 days, depending on the constitution and the individual's natural healing process.
de la brisure de la main	of the break in the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and at the knuckles there are few fractures, and only sprains many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, then the patient should cross his arms, and sit upright facing forward; then he should extend his affected hand onto a flat surface, and the assistant should extend the broken bones and set them straight, making sure they are well-aligned; then apply the plaster and dressing, if there is no abscess, and then put on a splint according to the size of the limb; and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is on the side of the palm near the belly, make a splint out of fabric, and instruct the patient to squeeze their broken hand; then wind a long strip of cloth around it, and the splint should be made of soft wood as large as the palm of the hand, and bound tightly in place, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is on the back of the hand, then you should put one splint above and another below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to one of us in the hand, whether it is the palm, he puts it equal, as it should be; and he presses it with the palm, and if you see, put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the index or one of the others, he makes it equal, and binds it with the healthy finger that is next; or you bind them all together, holding them steady, or you put a splint on, as in the palm; and take care in the restoration and in the preparation of hot abscess, and heal what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see it well when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration is that one binds one ligature above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his back, then he extends each ligature to his part equally; and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligatures should be towards the buttock, and the other ligature underneath the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then one ligature should be on the side of the knee and the extension should be down; then put the plaster on top of the bone so that it is level with its natural shape, and then apply the ointment, and the bandage, unless an abscess forms.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down, then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in such a way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap a hard bandage twice over the fracture, and leave the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and tie a long string between the thigh and the leg underneath the knee, so that the end of the string comes out at the top; then go back up the leg and the thigh with the bandage, then put splints on top of the fracture, and put another splint on the bone of the leg; then tighten the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to make it even, then start tying three or four turns over the fracture; and the more you go up from the fracture, the less you should tighten it; then pull on both ends of the string that you tied between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are on top, then go back down to the bottom at the end of the string, so that it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like this, so that no abscess, swelling or anything else forms.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that there is a piece of bone sticking out, it should be cut away if possible; and if not, then the area should be split open, and the wound treated as we have said many times before, until it heals.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken like when they put a stake in it, as in the shoulder and arm; all the same, with this restoration made, the patient does not improve.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you should know that the thigh is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the different complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the back of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee joint there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a slit, and it happens in every wound, whether there is feeling or not, and this is true for everyone.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one puts straight what is crooked at its joints, as much as it can be moved; then apply the plaster, and put on a round bandage if necessary, and bind it up as it should be; then follow all the directions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar conditions; and for each accident, do what is appropriate until the patient is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones; one is called the "mustelz" and the other the "foscile". Every kind of fracture happens in the leg as it does in the arm, and so its treatment is also the same, and all the procedures are the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, return above.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, great pain is felt, and it can be seen clearly; and it turns inside out.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, use extension, and set it straight, and bind the splints evenly; but still, if the fracture is severe and there are several pieces, then the extension should be lesser and gentler; and adjust it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take two splints of wood that match the leg from one side to the other, and make them as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap two bands above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this time the leg should not decline to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some administer a board as long as the leg, and it is made of wood, and they put the leg on it to prevent movement, and properly adjust that in the fracture where there is injury; and move the leg every day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; then cure until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of bone fractures of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	There is no fracture at the ankle, but sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and in both feet, and there are only bruises with various dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see the bones sticking out above each other, then put the foot on the ground as if it wanted to walk, and then put your own foot on top of it, where the bones are raised; then press down on it until they return to their place. Then apply the ointment and bandages, and under the sole of the foot place a small wooden board with two pieces of wood attached, then tighten the foot with a bandage, and after you have wrapped it up with cloth and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find that the bones are healed, whether they were broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are one or two broken bones, then treat them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider, then put under the foot that small board which I mentioned before, and tighten it in place; and if there are one or two, or more, broken bones, then place a splint on each one according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen, and tighten the board under the foot; and let the top of the board press hard against the sole of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, since we have spoken of them; and treat each case as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone in the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of a woman's nature are broken, have her sit up straight, then lean her towards her back, and hold her from behind. Then fill the opening of her nature with cotton, and insert as much as a finger; then make the woman stand up, and gently lift her back little by little, and the cotton will pop out as it reaches the entrance of her nature, and the bones will return with the finger. And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days; the fracture will be restored. If you wish, take a goat's bladder, tie a cane to the opening, fill the bladder with air by blowing into the cane, and the nature will return the fracture. Then fill it with cotton and leave it for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the man's or woman's elbow is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these breaks are not hidden from those who put their study and skill into it, and read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the breaks indicate in many ways the right way to restore them; understand this therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gullet and fill it with the penis; then wrap cloth around it tightly, and leave it for three days, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	from breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thighbone or shoulder, that he be treated immediately according to the remedies we have described earlier.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then restart the treatment for the fracture in that very hour or that day, if no abscesses have formed.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if deep abscesses arise, let the healing be until the tenth day, until the abscesses are settled, and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about an evil occurrence.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible above the uncovered heart, then you should gently put it in place with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not apparent to you in putting it equal with your hands, then use this instrument which is made of iron and is seven or eight inches long, and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, the needle must be taken by the surgeon so that he requires three or four of them for each cure of a fracture; and it should be round and somewhat thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the member during your work, and should be tapered at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because the curved shoulder should be placed on top of the visible bone; and the joint is reset once, so that it comes back into alignment.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is small, and the instrument cannot grip the bone well, then you must chip away at the head of the bone until the instrument can hold it.Et se li brisure est granz et li os est fends a longue traie, si covient que tu la remets sus le chief de l’os apparent, et tu le boutas tant qu’il soit igal; car le chief de l’os qui est apparant n’a point de force ne de substance.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot pull the bone back, as we have said, use an appropriate tool, whether a knife or a probe, to your ability; then remove what is stuck in the bone with scrapings and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Then do this so that it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with red wine, and carefully if it is on the wound; and do not put cerot or anything else containing oil on it, so that porridge and corruption does not come to it; then administer the ointment when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the surrounding area according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not pressed by the bandage; and many times people have done this foolishly, and have brought upon the patient either death or corruption; and let the constriction be softer and gentler than other bandages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not put ointment on it; but wrap around it, instead of ointment, hard pieces of cloth, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days the wound swelling, then remove what you have placed over it completely, and apply ointment that heals wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar remedies.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should loosen the member twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and closed up.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And one must arrange the limbs so that the bow runs smoothly downstream.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they persist for many days and it cannot be welded but keeps slipping back down the bow, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so you should probe the wound with a tent and remove all the dislodged pieces causing the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula or any other form of corruption appears, then you should treat it according to what he said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and protruding from the limb, such as in the thigh or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not treat it, for many die from it, but leave it alone until it closes over after 20 or 30 days; then cure the wound if you can, and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	brus
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	There often comes after the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, an ugly sight to see the deformation of the limb; and sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if the patient has diarrhea: administer astringent medicines such as aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, mixed with wine, egg white, or garlic; place them on the navel in poultices, and keep them firmly in place for several days; then remove them and repeat until the swelling goes down. Alternatively, apply a piece of well-prepared plaster to the area, as plaster has the property of drawing out inflammation from the limbs; if the swelling has become hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed, cut away the surface, and draw out the excess material; or have someone else scrape away at it until it is gone, and then heal it.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weakened after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains weak and fragile, this can happen for several reasons: it could be because it was bound too tightly and not properly aligned, or because there were too many ligatures that prevented proper circulation to the limb; or due to excessive swelling, or too much movement before healing was complete; or because there is a lack of blood in the body, which causes weakness.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you cause the patient to eat and make the body tender, so that blood multiplies within him; and the provider bathes him, and gives him joy and relaxation; then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great heat, and often sprinkles it with lukewarm water, until the heat penetrates the limb; and he returns to his natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the limb crooked after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are crooked after healing, and the broken bones are open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless, it does not lose its natural function: therefore do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb completely anew; many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm results, and sometimes death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torments are fresh, they should be sprinkled with lukewarm water, or herbs that soften, such as marshmallow leaves, and roots, and meadow-sweet, and similar medicines that soften; and you make a soothing ointment, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and you take the mucilage of marshmallow, and cook it with sheep tallow or sisimint oil, and make an ointment for it; or you take fat figs, and grind them with colon dung, and similar medicines that soften.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the dislocation is reduced by continually rubbing with moist hands.Et se il adontent est si grant dolor, ke li malaide ne pues demorer, si convint que tu le traies a la plaitre; car en ceste maniere li malaide deffaut plus tost et li dolors sont moult meins.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And movement must be brought to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosities are hardened like stone, and it is necessary to open them with an iron instrument, then they must be cut into gently with a subtle incision, and put cotton and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.Et de cest dislocation il y a grand douleur et grant lesion por coi il faille estude et science.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	And of this dislocation there is great pain and great injury, therefore it requires study and knowledge. When dislocation comes to someone, they must be reset without delay.Et si li membres est desaloiez, il covient le remestre a son leu;
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the place will swell and perhaps return to its place with difficulty; therefore, one must not move it at the hour when it is swollen: many times it brings on swelling and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient be bled, then let him rest until the abscesses are soothed; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and cure each member as the cure comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations of the head up to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Then the jaws become dislocated, and both dislocations occur in two ways: they are slightly displaced from their place and softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging down towards the feet, and saliva flows from the mouth so that it cannot be held closed, nor can the tongue be wrapped around words.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it will return to its proper place through various dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is entire and accomplished, then you must reset it hastily without tarrying; and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient and puts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and let the other fingers be spread out to make it even; and command the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And she looks at it evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is painful, especially when both mandibles are together, then treat them with hot water and oil until they are reset lightly; do not touch or move the jaw, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back equally and the mouth of the malady is closed well without softening, then put on dampened cloths made into a poultice of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his head should be between two pillows so that he does not move it to either side, nor strain to yawn, but take light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are bound and healed. Then he may eat whatever he wants lightly, and not exert himself to open his mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well bound and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their place, then fever and usual sickness come, and perhaps stomach problems, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and many die from it within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislodge it from within the chest and the abdomen; it is sometimes dislodged by force, and one can feel it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies consistently on his back and extends his arms; then press the dislocated area with your palm firmly, and it will return to place; then put on the poultice and bandage, and bind it tightly; and the shoulder joint near the neck cannot be dislocated; if it does become dislocated and returns to place once, then put on the poultice and bandage and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed. In this way, the shoulder joint is also returned to its place when it becomes dislocated from its position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You should know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: one is when it dislocates at the bottom near the armpit; the second is near the foot; and occasionally it dislocates at the top, though this is rare. It does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; often it dislocates below towards the armpit, especially in those who are thin, for in them it pops out easily; but in those who are plump, it pops out and goes back in with a little effort.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, some men experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must test it to make sure, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And you will recognize a downward dislocation when there is an obvious difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one; you will find a pit at the top of the shoulder, and underneath the armpit at the top of the shoulder, it will look like a hole; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose nor move in any way. And if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden but obvious at the touch; this kind of dislocation does not need to be reduced when new, unless the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the assistant to lift the sick hand up, then place your knees under the shoulder, and pull the joint firmly upwards in its place; and the assistant lifts the hand and stretches it up, then places it down again; this will correct it quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and they should be given softening and soothing ointments, such as decoctions of alder and fenugreek and meadow sweet in water, and they should be eased; then the patient should be laid on their back, and a layer of wool equal in thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed underneath the shoulder, and the minister should place his heel on the sto, and lift the top of the shoulder gently, and pull the hand of the affected side; and another minister should hold the top of the affected shoulder so that it does not move downward; the shoulder will return right away, and you should do this according to this manner: and you should have a man present who is larger than the patient; he should stand straight toward the side, and push his shoulder underneath the affected shoulder, and lift the affected shoulder up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister should pull the hand of the affected side downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the pain is too slight, then one can place something heavy upon it, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And one can reset it in another way also: take a long, pointed stake and push it into the ground so that the shoulder is as wide as a fist, but not too thick or too thin; then place it underneath the patient, but with a cloth over it, and let the patient's arm hang down on the other side; then extend their hand downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place suddenly; and if it does not return despite all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment: take an iron stake two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a pointed tip so that it can be pushed into the ground, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie it onto the tip of the shoulder with soft cloth so that the shoulder does not bleeds the patient; then place it under the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm above the shoulder, and tie the shoulder to the arm, and the arm to the head of the hand; then place the arm on a small log, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever way it may be, you must place under the armpit a woolen ball equal in size, then apply the prepared ointment of mill-powder, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the armpit gradually, and tie the string over the ointment, and hold the hand to his neck, and let the hand remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eats little, as long as the members are comfortable, for he will heal more quickly; and then eat more after .v. or .vii. days, and move him; and if he is stiff and not softened, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has been dislocated due to moisture or for some other reason, then you must administer cauterization at three openings, as described in the chapter on cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it still dislocates after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold, and he cannot lift his arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fully healed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations that are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with hands, and one administers to another; and treat it until it is healed.Li dislocation qui sont devers lou col, si doit on amener li col vers sou corps, et li membres vers le col, et li arces vers li membres, et li membres vers les arces, et li col vers les mameles; et si fait qu’il soit confortez.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb becomes lame and stiff with movement, then the patient should take many baths until the lameness is relieved and it returns to its former condition.
de la dislocation dou coute	about dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by fingers, and it returns with fingers; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, for one can see and feel it well, and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is broken, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you should reset it as soon as abscesses form, for if abscesses form, then it will be painful to reset; and by chance it may not be able to be completely reset, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and sometimes death ensues.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands bent according to the joint, around, above and below, and push the joint towards his armpit together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and pulls from the root of the palm, the joint which has become dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it will not go back into place, then administer a strong extension; and while one minister holds the arm straight, the other minister bends the arm, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then after you have wrapped a long, double cloth around it, and when the minister has joined the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint back into place firmly; and when it is in place, apply a dry plaster with egg white, and hold the arm firmly against the sick neck, and leave it for several days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, he removes the bandage and leaves it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, he re-applies the plaster and the bandage, and leaves it for several days, until it is firmly in place; then he releases it.Et se li malaides a grant dolor en la jointe, si met sus une pomade que iloigne le calor et le doler, et puis le laisse.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels stiffness after the joint is moved and it moves, then bathe and rub it gently, and press until it is relieved; or put a pack of fat mutton on the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the pack back on, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see fit, put warm moist cow dung with butter on it, and apply pressure; then it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint swells or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	The method of reduction is to put the affected hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and look at it and make sure it is even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bend it until it returns to its place; however, you should also check that it is in the right place. Then put the patient's back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then the patient should lie with his back to the table, and the examiner puts his hand over that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it goes back into place, that is good. If not, then strain it with soothing poultices on the hot abscess, and leave it like that without re-examining.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, then the joint will remain crooked; and it does no harm to the patient as long as his hand is weak and he cannot grip anything: so you should know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is nothing else to do but to strain by cautery beyond the case, and perhaps nothing else helps.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then extract and let it be for five days, then loosen and leave it as is.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then moisten with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.Et s’il a longuement demouré en l’estrain, si doit on li mettre la plastre sus le chiés et sus li col, car il est leus de l’un et de l’auter, si qu’il ne se puet bien demourer en l’estrain.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the inside; then they are dislocated, and you must push the head of the finger towards the part where it is dislocated; and hold it there for two days, and then put it in line that day; and do not lie down, as we have said, and loosen it at night, and make him move it, and tie it during the day; and do this often, until it is healed; and do the same, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from a dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade or collarbone is dislocated, there is no cure, for death comes quickly with this malady.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the excretions escape without willing them, and he cannot hold them in, and many times some members are weakened, or both hips or both arms or one; and many times the sciatica changes to four parts; that which changes in the back is called 'gilbositez': the cure is that you should find out if the gilbositez came from childhood: there is no cure or healing for it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the old methods of cure described in great detail, but they did not bring much benefit in all cases; but I have abbreviated them according to my understanding and have devised instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the sciatica which comes to the front, there is no cure or healing; and also that which comes directly to both sides, and cannot be cured without that which comes directly to the back, as I said; and it should be extended over its face in one place evenly, and it should not be twisted; then put a coal at the head in the ground, formed into a ball, and another at the feet; and tie a string under the sores of the disease, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers should hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the coals; and they should be well-fastened, the coals as we have said, and the minister should put his palms over the spine, until it eases.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this cure, take a table three feet long, and lie beneath the wall, and let the patient be on their side, and place the head of the table beneath the wall; then put the middle of the table on the spine, and put the patient's feet on the other end of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place. And if you see fit, do it on the turn that turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should insert two brands at the head of the patient's arm, and two others near the feet, with a palm's width of space between each brand, both above and below; and let there be a hole in each brand for the rope to pass through, and fix the brands firmly in the ground so they do not move. And between each set of two brands, place a turning brand, over which the ropes will turn, and on each turning brand place a small brand a palm's width long, to guide the turn; then tie one end of the rope that is among the brands to the turn towards the head, and the other end of the rope towards the feet to the other turn, and all the ministers turn their turns to the whole rope, and the master puts the spine in an even position as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, then put on a desiccant plaster with plenty of egg white, and then the stumps, and then the stele of a tablet three inches long, which purples the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle cooling until he is healed; and if anything comes in the end of health, then one should administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stele that we mentioned above; and sometimes they administer a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower spine of the back, and they think it is dislocation; but it is the bone that appears, so one must not have any presumption about it: by chance it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come about as dislocations, and not as in other joints; and the joint of the hip is healed according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and mostly inside, and less healed in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee appears more than the healthy one, and the diseased one cannot bend his knee to the fire; and the part which is near is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes from the inside out, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it comes from the outside in, are that his leg is well according to their appearance; nevertheless, he cannot bend his knee without pain, and if one makes him walk, he cannot go forward, and he holds back his urine, and the veins swell, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has it in the back are that he cannot bend his knee or double up, and that leg is more crooked than the other; and the groin is relaxed, and the head of the thigh bone is below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment for this kind of dislocation is that you examine whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, and there is no treatment for it; and he must not be presumptuous.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for one in whom the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four kinds of dislocation, you should hurry to return the joint to its place, and stretch it in and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to its place, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong minister and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one hand tied above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand above in such a way that he presses his hands under his heels, then he pulls him with a rope on the thigh; and another holds his head with a rope; and they all stretch upward and downward at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground at once and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four ways, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then the cure must be applied according to its likeness. When the dislocation is in the buttocks, you should support the patient on his healthy side, then tie the rope around the root of the thigh, and around the part below the anus; then stretch the rope upward toward the anus, and toward the scrotum; then have another minister grab his arms and embrace the thick part of the patient's thigh, and stretch it forcefully outward: it will return to its place immediately. This kind of dislocation is the lightest of all.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot bring it together in the way we have said, then you must tie the patient's two feet together with a strong leather thong above the heels and above the knees, and let the affected leg be stretched out two fingers more than the other; then let him be hung up by the head of a pole, and let his arms be two fathoms above the ground; then command a minister to hold the head of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient who holds the thigh firmly, for the joint will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is returned, let the patient lie as we have said in that which concerns gout; and tighten the thong on the affected leg properly, and also on the foot; then put two brands of fire, one at the head and one at the feet, and place the brand between the thighs of the patient in the form; and wrap moist cloths around it so that he does not scorch the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and let the surgeon hold the dislocation equal to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it comes back, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on the table and press him as we have said in the chapter on dislocations, and lay the patient on his sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the leg slowly, and according to what I have said; and the helper puts his weight on the painful shoulder, then presses with the other hand, and pulls downward toward the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is on the side, he should not be stretched out flat or raised up from the bed, but he should be as if his hip were dislocated and he were lying on his sound side, as we have said in the chapter on lying down with a dislocated hip; and he should lie on his face, with the ligament stretched as we have said before, and someone should press on the joint against the table; and when the patient stretches out his legs and they are even, then draw the thighs together and apply the ointment and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then loosen it and put on the ointment again. And if you see that they are even, then bind it as before, and let him rest for another three days; then loosen it and let him walk comfortably until his limbs are healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to know, inside and outside, and behind; and does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not stick to his thigh, you know that he is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee joint firmly; and another minister extends his foot so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it sticks well to his thigh lightly; and put the plaster on top, and make the leg warm at the thigh, and the ligatures together strongly for three days or four, then release it; and the patient should not work at all until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not at all, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts in front of the part where it is dislocated; the movements are light, and one should lightly extend it with their hands when it is only dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, then you should make the patient sit up straight, and hold his leg firmly by the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and press the foot firmly upwards; and do this twice, as we have said, by bending and stretching the foot; if it comes back, that is good; if not, then repeat the operation, for it will come back; and if it still cannot be reduced in this way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix the strap firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and wind cloth around it so that he does not kick the leg; then one man holds the hip, and another stretches the foot upwards with their hands or with a cord tied to the ankle; then stretch each man equally, and the strap should be firmly between the patient's buttocks to hold him in place when you stretch; then put your fingers evenly over the dislocation with your hands, and another man holds the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at its worst, then put on the plaster and bandages, and bind it tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature softens, then bind it tighter; then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and let the patient walk in four days; and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a boil comes, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the armpits
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the armpits are dislocated, they must be stretched without effort, and this is a minor issue.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any part of the foot, you should have the patient sit on a flat surface or table, completely upright, and put your foot over what is visible of the joints, then press down firmly on your foot until it is restored; and when it is even and nothing is protruding, place a board with two notches under the sole of the foot, then bind it tightly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let him rest until he recovers.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the cure, unless you are wise in the art and have long practiced it, and unless you are compassionate and merciful and cautious; nor should you be rash. And at the beginning use things that soothe a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery; but when you do see hope, then immediately reset the limb to its proper place, so that the hot abscesses may heal; and once the limb is in place, administer soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and treat the wound as it should be treated with drying ointments; and if there is a fracture, and small bones are displaced, then set the bones, and do as we have said for simple dislocations; and beware of entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cause changes in your body according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and body.
Amen	So be it.
