O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	1. O vos, tres chiers filz, je vous ai accompli ce livre qui est au périmètre de la science de la médecine, assemblant l'emprise de lui, et j'ai fait la fin par ses expositions et par ses déclarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	2. Et m'est venu en vision que je vous ai accompli ce traiti, qui est partie de l'œuvre des mains, c'est à savoir «chirurgie».
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	3. Et par ce qu'l'œuvre des mains est traçée dans notre région et est étrangie d'autant que tout, si elle est perie de la science et de l'expérience, et n'est rien de plus que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens qui ont faits ces choses.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And this has come about from the error and emptiness, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I seem to think that I will revive this by assembling the ordering of this cauterization according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will assemble the forms of the fire-making instruments and other tools of the work with the alignment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is their craft.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled hands masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who enters into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of the parts, and have knowledge of the bones, the nerves, the joints, and the number of the limbs, and the movement and rest of the living body.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Iocras says that without the non and with the hand is not, and with the will is few; and likewise in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we say that those who are not acquainted with these things, if they try, they may err and harm men; therefore, I have often seen many of these who become entangled in this science and abandon it and common sense and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I see a madman who cuts off the testicles of a woman and cuts the arteries of her neck; because so much blood issues that the woman dies in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And see if another mirror who treats a pierce of a man's ear, and the piercing was big; if it is removed with the one that has a piece of the bladder, and died the son of the man in three years.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I have already been accused of being a barber, and see the position of the patient and the size of the piercing, and if it was cut well, he died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see if another mirror who cured the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break it was plaited; and the patients of ignorance were forced to break the break on the plait as soon as possible, and did not leave any pain in the plait, and left it in time that the leg was healed and the piez and came to destruction. And he commanded that he not slide away; and it took a long time that the leg was completely healed and the piez and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am summoned to go to him, and I hurried to remove the leg; and when I dislocated it, if it was in its place and did not cause any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, all paths of the body were already confirmed or member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another miracle that my spell will crumble, and then it will burn because of the wickedness of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancre, when it is free of melancholic umor, only then can one touch it with iron if it is not in its place and can completely restore what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	For this reason, three-year-old children, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: it is knowledge, whether or not there is danger in other arrangements; and I will show you in each page of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, it is important that you keep your children away from them, so that they do not speak ill of you. If you take your weapons in hand and take your medicines lightly but firmly, and use the best way possible for the grace of God to come to your help and be healthy; and let the unpleasant diseases of grief be cured; and keep your weapons away from what you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to another with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen's advises in his warnings: "Do not take medicine for the treatment of illness, lest you be called foolish.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have heard this treatise is described in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and hot medicine cauteries, and it is ordered from the head down to the feet; and forms of stumbling blocks, and burning irons for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and pricking, and ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is ordered and the forms of stumbling blocks.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is ordered by the loins and the forms of the strusions.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	However, let us remember our work, it is necessary that I give the quality of the aid and not harm to any complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid and not harm is the longest word and the most subtle science and the secret remedy; and for this they speak more of the sages, and agree with each other, and few of their words are spoken, because I make longer speeches.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally with all types of matter, as long as the matter is suitable: it is to know hot matter with substance, and dry matter with substance.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry matter, there is no one who says that cauterization is not great help, and the other says the opposite: that cauterization is only helpful for disease that comes from chlorine and searing.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be treated for hot disease by chlorine, nor by searing; and it is said by those who say the opposite that cauterization helps great with hot disease that comes from the hearts of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you perceive the heart of the man and his moisture on the complexion of fire, you truely see the heart in fear.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I accommodate myself to this speech.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	For all ways, it does not interfere with anything but those who have experienced it and know the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their occurrences and the spaciousness of tenses; other complexions do not have our fear, however, in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And then they are sewn together and adjusted at the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Understand, children, that cauterization is a method of treatment when it contains the secrets of the cures, and above all, it is an ardent medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the flesh is simple, and only comes to cause pain in the member that is cut, and does not harm other members.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The ardent medicines come from one member to another by removing, and they bring the diseases of other members to the malady member for cure; and by chance, if the flesh has much substance and good nature, it does not cause pain, if it has no superfluity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	1. And I found this in my research through experiment and the length of service and study I have dedicated to this art, and it is true; and for this I apologize for the length of the word, as I only want to share with you the secret that is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, as it treats the diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says by demonstrating; and receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	1. Know, my son, that the cauters should be made in such a way that they do not hurt, and they should be applied correctly.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	1. I say that the cauter is useful in all places because the pain caused by it is not misplaced by the aid of the cauter; and moreover, if the cauters are for necessary pains and hurts that cannot wait for the time that greatest malice comes to the member, they are useful.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	1. And never think that the wound is healed by cauterization alone; for the disease cured by cauterization has no return. 2. He tells him this, but it is not so easy to do well, because cauterization is only a medicine that dries the complexion and drys the humors that cause pain, and is worthy of medicine for its bravery, and for the virtue of its work and its nobility.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	1. However, there is something that can be said about the disease that it does not return once the complexion of the patient becomes dry and the disease itself is dried up; and these superfluities are gathered in the patient through the acquisition of flesh and meat, unless cauterization is administered to him or he has little flesh and moisture, as cauterization does for pain and the superfluities, but most pain does not return; but this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	1. And many people do not understand that cauterization is a part of medicine, and this can be seen; but they only believe that cauterization is after medicine, but we understand it is false, and cauterization is a part of medicine because when we manage any disease with any cure, if it does not work, we apply cauterization, and it does work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	2. However, it is well known that cauterization is a part of medicine, not according to the attention of the foolish.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	3. The ancients said that an instrument made of gold was as bad as one made of iron, and they said this was because of the quality of the gold and its high substance; and they said that the use of cauterization did not cause any harm, but it is true because I have experienced it and found that it is true in some men; and cauterization made of gold is as good as iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	When you are holding an instrument of gold, you do not know whether it is hot or cold by the color of the gold, and it has cooled down; and if it is heated too much, it can melt; then it will be enough to prevent it.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that's why we use fire cautery because we have already messed up in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or if you have ordered this chapter of the loosened pieces, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is used for moisture and coldness in the loosened pieces, and it is done due to a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head as eyes, ears, and numerous sleeps, and even for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is if the patient is purged by solvent medicine altering the head III nuis or IIII, according to which virtues and age and custom of the patient he can endure; then repeat the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then place the trunk of your palm between the roots of his palm between his two fingers; and if you see your two hands, then bleed him and wash the cauterization which is called "olivare", according to which form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it over the joint with ink, and make descend and tighten your hand repeatedly; then relax your hand slightly, and reward the joint if you see the bone I small; and if you do not see the bone, then repeat the cauterization as long as you see the bone as I told you; then take a piece of cloth, and wet it with saliva, and put it over the joint, and let it stay for three days; then make a moist compress with cotton; and leave it until the burn is healed; then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if the ancient ones say that as the wound becomes more overgrown, it purges itself; and for this it helps to aid.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these say that one must shave the cauterization so much that part of the bone is exposed, and then remove what is exposed of the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that the cauterization must be shaved so much that it presses against the bone as wide as the vessel that women use because the humors flow out; and it must be left overgrown for a long time; afterward, it must be treated and sutured.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	1. These two methods of cauterization seem to be quite effective in general, despite any fear some men may have; and I believe that I should leave them alone, as the heads of the bones are weakened by continuous natural solutions, just as we have seen in other parts of the body; and even when the head of the bone is weak naturally, the first appearance of cauterization seems more salve and milder to me, and I therefore use it accordingly.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	2. of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	3. When the entire head is in chronic pain and lasts for a long time, if it must use the plasters and pills called "cochie", and purging of the head and oils and creams; and when the cauterization is done as we have described before, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	The patient's condition is severe, and it should not be too cold; therefore, we recommend using fire cautery on the area we have previously described as having a cautery.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After applying fire cautery to each corner of the patient's head, as we have previously described, and then performing a cautery on the area called "tendons"; and these are located where you see the bone; and hide your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will explain further; and it is necessary that the cauteries be more subtle than those on the chief's tendon, and this form is:
dou cautere dou chief	1. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	2. If sudden pain occurs in one part of the body, and the disease spreads throughout the oil, and the head is purged with medicines that have been modified, and the other cures I mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, but none of them have any effect: therefore, I performed cauterizations in two ways, which is to say, with medicinal fire and iron.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	3. If you ignite a dried alum stick and scrape out the inside and fill the wound with it, then close the temple where the pain is held in place so that you can replace the alum stick; and when it is replaced, if the lip and the eye are tightened and left for 12 hours; then remove the alum stick and treat the wound with the alum stick again, leaving the wound for 2 or 3 days; then pour water into the wound as much as possible until it drains out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the application of ointment when it is healthy; and if you see that I write any burning medicines that I have written or treat with burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cauterization is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterization tool, and its form is as follows.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the form of a ring or has a small opening, and it is placed on the painful part, and hold your hand and gently press the iron a little, as much as half of the pressure is comfortable; and ease your hand that the artery does not burn, which is relieved, and there is an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting on a piece of cloth made of hemp, and then wrapping the leg with three layers; then he puts a moistened cloth in a bandage, and then treats the leg with ointment as soon as it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this ulcer with the cauterizing instrument called "cultellare" at all points, and make sure not to cover the artery in this ulcer that is not far enough.
de emigraine	ulcer
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When treating an ulcer as we have mentioned earlier in divisions of diseases, and not profiting from it, and see that the cauterization does not help the patient, therefore it is necessary to use the cauterizing instrument called "cultellare" as soon as it is white; then draw a line of half a dozen on the leg, and place your hand once, and hold it so as not to cover the artery and do not pull it too much against the bone; and wear the mandible that is silent when cutting, and the nerves only move the silent and spasmus does not come to the patient, and wear the correction of sang from the artery when it is coated, or coated with great pain and immediately to the one who does not know, and who is not studied and experimented; and leave the ulcer in its place; but I will tell you how to relieve pain when the artery is coated, and I will show you where it is treated in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	1. If you see that this cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize the other end of the head as we have said, and treat the wound as soon as it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cauterization or the chapter on the extraction of the artery with the cauterization that has two cuts; and this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	2. due to cold ears
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	3. When pain comes to the ear from cold, and it is treated with soluble medicines and other remedies as we have said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then apply this cauterization called "points," whether it is in the form of:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, take the entire ear of the deaf person, or the two if it hurts in both, and stretch a little from the root of the ear because you have felt the ear's bone; and at each point after ten days for each ear; afterwards cure the ear until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	after the pain of the mouth.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not the same as those that move due to fluxes, as we have said in divisions of the disease; and do not make cauterization like those that come from the scorbutus and the spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that is caused by the fumes of urine and excretions of the head and throat, and it does not value, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another at the corner of the temple, and the third in the joint of the two lips; and place the cauterization in the part that opens naturally, and make the cauterization at the tip of the ear opposite the corner of the ear, and another in the temple as far apart as some fingers; and leave the cauterization as long as it does not hurt half of it; and this is the form of the cauterization.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient's appearance resembles that of a scarred one that we have shown before, but it is more subtle and requires that the cuts be slightly larger; after treating the area as I have described, it should be healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy occurs and you treat it as we have described, and there is no fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the two front teeth, one on the chief, and one on the "vasels" as we have mentioned before, and cauterize the mouth of the stomach; and treat as we have advised.
de litargie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of drugs and alter the brain; after that, the physician removes the head of the patient, and he puts on the occipital the emplaustre of snips which is written or treated with emplastres; and this is the way of cauterization: as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healthy, well and good; and if not, make three cauterizations on the head as you descend down the neck, and leave an interval of two fingers between each cautery; and the cure is as with others, and if you see any assistance, and the physician is wounded, make the cauterization in the mileau; and if masters are, two on each side, and the cure until it is healthy; and if the cauterization called "olivare" is used, as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Of the cold head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be washed with years and the things we have said before; then the patient's head is cold, and the cautery is made on the head and each cornea, and the eye and the third the spine; and if you have more skill, and the body is moist and the patient is cold and the disease is far, and it is made four cauteries on the spine; and it leaves as long as the most painful part is ars, and gently hold your hand; after the cure as soon as it is healthy, and it is the cauterization that we call "olivare" that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	The first sentence to translate is "de l’epilempsie". The
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilepsy should only be treated with fire cauterization, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and suffers from poor medical care.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is children who cannot endure, make a gargle and mastication modifying the brain often with good meats; after they regain their strength, and I do the cauterization according to what we have said before, the vein, and each corner; and if the patient is weak and suffers, I do the cauterization as I have said to the one who has paralysis and mollification of the corps, on the spine of the back and collar, and it is the olive cauterization according to the way we have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, then perform the cauterization as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	If the cause of melancholy is superfluity or corrupt and fatty moisture, then the cauterization should be performed as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is the declining superfluity of melancholy, and the corse of the patient's moisture becomes heavy, then he should drink something according to what his brain can bear, in the division before.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the patient's head is washed; after making a linen bandage well made, as well as the circle, if you put it on his head; and if the patient's head is swollen, and held well by all parts, then present the liniment, and it is good to anoint with old honey; and heat the patient's body to a proper temperature, so that he can endure it; after taking off the circle by removing it from his head, and letting it cool down; and do this once a week for a while with another government balm, as long as he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to make multiple pricks all over the area being cauterized.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization makes the scalp grow long and thick; then, it is placed on cotton wool moistened with grease and linen.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair of the eyebrows.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the hair comes first as signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and do so, making sure to cleanse the head and all parts with water, and wash it more times than usual.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the patient commands to wash his head, I cauterize his head, and then cauterize on both temples where the hair is thickest, or where it is thinnest; and cover all the areas and arteries that are exposed due to the cauterization, and make them long according to the size of the temple; and wash away the sweat, and if too much sweat comes out, then it is good for you.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision, how to perform the cauterization as you have seen; and never is it done that they cut or burn the two bones of the heel.
dou cors des larmes	Tears of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed, and flow down the cheeks, or appear to be from the arteries that are in appearance cold and blue; and we see that they are superfluous, cold, watery, therefore I perform the cauterization as I have described at the beginning of the chapter: I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on both temples, and I cauterize on the two bones; and if it is necessary, then the cauterization is felt on the sole of the foot with every small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	A heavy flow of tears due to the denseness of the hairs
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we said in the division, and it does not help, then drink a third dose of malic acid; after that, open the head, and perform a cauterization or a burn with olive oil; and perform two burns with cauterization called "clavicles" on the two sides of the nose, a little cutting the nostrils; and you will be sewn to the artery that you did not cut.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cauterization called "clavicles":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the ointment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cauterization called "olive" that we have mentioned.
de coi ci est li forme:	If the patient's hair is long and even, they can let it grow until it reaches their should
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that I am doing this cauterization on the two points of the hair; and do not let go of my hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	not a single hair that has not been oiled.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is no occasion when the oiled hair turns into wax, and it is poured with oil, and then it is cauterized according to two methods: that is, by fire or by an ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	If the fire cautery is instructed to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are equal, then put the patient in good health; afterwards, sign on the paper the figure that is as large as the flesh of the child, and as the beginning of the sign of the hair; then he puts cotton wool in the grease of the oil and musky of persil, then rinse the cauterization of the place where it is formed.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure that you have signed a few times, let the eyes be in their place; and the signs of health of the eye are when you see the paper retreat, and the hairs raised at the point of the oil; then gently touch your hand, and leave for three days, then put cotton wool on the wound as long as the burn is healed; after the cure of ointment as it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hair comes, and the paper is softened, then the cauterization resumes on the same part as before, just as you have done first; and if the hair is long, if the cauterization is done until the paper is raised to its natural position, and is even, and does not touch the hair.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cauterization is when you instruct the patient to let the hair grow long and even, then make a circular shape with paraffin on the sheet of mirlit; then take French soap and hot water, one each, and mix well; and apply it immediately if it does not refrigerate, then stretch it back to the form you made like the sheet of mirlit, and put on the paper for the hairs; and if the disease remains only in the oil, if necessary, wrap it in gauze; and put a cotton ball moistened in vinegar in the corner of the diaper; and the head of the shoulder is in your hand and shows the medicine to the patient, and press the poultice and loof with your thumb all the time that the shoulder feels burning from the medicine, because it feels burning also like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if the medicine does not help you.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the mordication is passed, if you lift the leg, and see that the paper is lifted as well, as it was lifted by tightening with fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, continue to apply medicine on the leg or if the medicine does not reach, as long as your efforts are equal, and your nails are in place; then put cotton wool on the blister as soon as the skin is dry, after curing the leg with the ointment called "dyafenis" and other, as long as it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have the skill to sharpen yourself well in your craft by great care, so that you do not lack knowledge of medicine for it.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs are pricked in it, then the medicine is applied to the part that has become softened by the paper, in the same way you have done before; afterwards, the cure until it is healthy; and this is the form of the fleek of the mirror.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And knowing that the men are different in size and length, according to your instructions; and do not be mistaken in the right way to that which is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by fire cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your cures are not effective, therefore it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to cut his hair short and even; and then, between your hands, shave the hair in such a way that it does not move or change; afterwards put cotton wool in the corners of the eye or on the juice of persillon or oil; afterwards heat the cauterization iron which is divided: and touch the hair with the cauterization iron if it forms like a needle of flame, assemble the iron so that it touches the hair; if you see, if one end is pointed and the other is flat, and if you see, if it is like a tent; but nevertheless, this which is touched will be good for your purpose.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it swells, and the dough is extracted and dried; if it opens, and the bowels move, then after forming the cauterization, put your hand on the cauterization at the part where the oil is not exposed, so that your hands do not get greasy; and place the cauterization in the oil grease, and it corrupts.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterization at the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then continue the cauterization once more, and if you have to, and leave it for three days; then put cotton wool on the bure, and apply the desiccating ointment as long as it is dry, and when forty days have passed and it is dry, if apply an ague corrosive medicine as long as the bone is exposed; and follow according to what comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that no ancient one said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understands the fistula, and then put in the forceps the subtle camahan of which there is this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it to the quantity of an ounce of oil; and hold your hand firmly with the forceps, and do not move the patient at all, only when the plasters have melted, until they stick to the skin or wound: the plaster if it is close to the fistula, and the healthy one for the mervellous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer an enema to the newborn, and return the fistula to its original position according to what is appropriate for the baby.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	There are times when cracks in the lips are called "cracks," and at the same time in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in divisions, and the patient does not benefit, then use a small cauterization tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it in those fissures as much as it can go; afterwards, treat the limb with salve until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the gall
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms at the root of the gallbladder or in the ureter, or in the roots of the teeth, and it becomes watery and forms a fistule; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit: therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize according to the size of the fistule; after the bolt or peritonitis of the fistule, and hold your hand until the fire comes out of the wound, and if it is inside; and once or twice, after the treatment we have said in the treatments, as soon as it is healthy; and if it is cured once or twice, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to discover the limb and open the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine and it does not work, then place a piece of wet cloth in your mouth; after that, scrape the cavity that formed on the tooth as it did before in this way that you put a nail under the tooth; and remove the teeth from the gum firmly, and hold your hand with the pain in the root of the tooth; then gently release your hand and continue the cavity according to your will; then fill the gums with bitter salt water, and paint it once an hour for a few days.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gums become soft and restrained, and the moisture is desiccated.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from cold, or if it is cold or visible, and medical treatments are of no use, then it is necessary to have skill in cauterization in two ways: cauterization with a burning instrument and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with a burning instrument if it is such that you can ignite it with wool and end it in a iron or copper fork; then take cotton and envelop the point of a needle, and make the wool burned, and place it on the painful tooth hardly and hold until it is cooled; and often I do so until the strength reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are burning, and put it on the tooth bleeding, and put it on the iron charred as much as the flesh reaches to the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	1. If the fire cautery is large enough that you can burn a piece of iron or copper, and it is big enough to fit in the mouth of the patient; after heating the cauterization tool, let the cauterization form come afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterization is cooled down; do this often because the pain will be eased either that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	2. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with a piece of cloth soaked in hot water while pressing the cauterization tool, and then pull it out; and this is the shape of the cauterization:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	I make a cut according to what you want, and according to the type of wound you have; this is the shape of the knife:
des scrophules	of scrophules
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are soft and cold, and do not respond to digestion with medicines, then wash the knife blade with water after it comes out of the form, and make as many openings as necessary for the fumes to exit through the other side; and put the knife blade against the abscess once, or until it sticks, as long as there is pus coming out; and if the abscess is small, put the knife according to the amount of pus, and leave it for three days; and dip the blade in cotton wool after it is dry; afterwards, cure the wound with ointments and poultices as long as it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	1. The shape of the chain:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture reaches the throat's opening, and at the same time when a cold complexion comes about, it is then necessary that the patient be treated with soluble medicines first; after which I perform the fire cautery at the base of the chin, and make sure you do not go too far into the chin, and do not burn the flesh but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that I perform another cautery at the joint of the collarbone at the top of the spine, and the one called "clavicle"; and it cures the head as we have said when it is healthy.
de la toust	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the wounds and diseases of the body are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever and is not inflamed, and the disease is chronic, then make incisions with the forceps on the parts you wish; and the other incision is made between the second and third toes; and this is called the "clavicle" according to the form that is said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	If you see, make a cauterization by pricking all the points called "poins" that form in front in the disease of the ears; and let the points be as many as XXX, or fewer.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the shoulder according to what is said above, and let the cauterization be made at III points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because they are more light, for that you make III in cop:
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder:
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, the patient lies on his back and side; after loosening the girdle that causes the twitching, use your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, then heat the cautery which has the nails of this kind, and this is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the girdle as far as it reaches to the cost, and come the fugure of the cautery together IV times; and because it is made with the cautery which has III nails, because the figure of cauterization is six cauteries; and the nerves according to the fineness of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has III nails:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And no time is lost in adjusting this I nerve because it has VIII cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cauterization, tie the wound with thread; after the patient has rested, do not let the limbs hang loose for as long as they are well comfortable.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated again, something liquid comes out quickly, therefore, perform cauterization on the largest cauterization nail or press on the cauterizations.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healthy.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come cold and moisture as much as they are drawn to their complexion, and the catharsis is multiplied on them, and according to the customary cures, and they do not benefit, it is necessary that the patient be supported on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	1. This is the first step of the process. I perform three cauterizations on the sole of the foot due to the quantity of a dose, at all the cauterization points, and two cauterizations on the costals as they appear at three angles, and are spaced apart between each other so they do not merge together as they sweat; and they should be so that they do not touch the two parts of the knee, and the figure of the cauterizations should be in this form similarly:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	2. And if you see a large cauterization on the stomach according to this form; and the one who feels pain from this cauterization, should cauterize by touching and seizing on the stomach at the point according to what you see of the quantity; then cauterize all the points called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure we had before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver suffers from pain and moisture and large ventosity, as long as it is left in its natural complexion due to superfluities; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, and if he does not benefit, then the patient should be cut open according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, deferring the epigastrium, whether the stomach comes from; and there should be space between each cautery and the greatest of a doe; and they should be long and thin in the body, and not press hard with their hand on the cautery; and only the half that is less than the knee, and only the patient on its side; and if it cannot be, then it is crooked, and extends his legs, and leans on his breasts; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish, if you burn these fire cauteries, be subtle and gentle in the art, and may you not scorch the entire body, for you will dry out the entire body; and that it does not become foul, for the hair is very delicate in some places, and you must see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has gone into the liver, and you see whether it is in the liver or in the cloth: if it is in the liver, it feels the patient's pain is not too great; and if it is in the cloth, it feels sharp pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure has made the eyes clear, if it comes that the patient's pain is subsided; and then stretch the limb or the apostime is, and then heat the cauterization which is similar to the raisin, depending on what form it is.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	1. And the cauterization is done as long as the hair is long and even, and it does not fall out, until the wound has healed; after the treatment according to the treatment of fluids as soon as it is healthy; and no other cauterization is needed but only this one, which has been studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by these hands these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	2. And can it be overcome with great effort, and I seem that it is worth leaving it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	3. A douce cauterization of weeping sores.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	4. The ancients said that one should make a cauterization of weeping sores using aristole roots in this manner: take an aristole root as long as you can find it, and let it be dry and very large and long as your two; and grind it into oil, and then heat it and cauterize the cauterization between the force and the col, and make two cauterizations on descending in the part that is bare of the beard; and make one between the fifth ribs and the seventh, declining downward from a pouch; and cauterize the nipple, and the other in the stomach, and between the shoulders, and the deflowered nipples, and the cautery between the shoulders; and do not press too hard with your hand, as you would smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no ancient man said that any man used a fire cautery like this, and they thrust it between the ribs, as soon as it comes to the abscess; and immediately there is pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	However, in this case, there is no pain or death for the patient now, or fistula that cannot be cured.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of the cures, and it does not profit, therefore there are three ways of cauterization that you have mentioned.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	1. If you are doing three cauterizations or four, according to the length of the hairs, according to the figure of the cauterization we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient's hand be on his back; and another way of cauterization is if you scrape the cauterization that has two points, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and ease the knee where the hairs are, or the pain of the patient comes from the side, and the elevation according to the knee, according to the length of the arm, and the cauterization should be according to the breadth of the arm.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you burn the two nerves until the knees are perceived from the other side, then take the cauterization, and if you see, cauterize all the cauterization with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten pituitary due to long tension, and this is enough that the other cures before said.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for dropsy, for it is done in the way called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations enter the bowels, and one through the stomach, and one through the liver, and one through the kidneys, and two through the back near the spine, and one at the anus; and make sure the cauterization is close to the spinal curvature of the knee.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the cauterization be done with long hair, and not tightening the care of the patient after cauterization; and the healing will speed up, and they will be assembled together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterization is made on the belly with the clavicle that we have before show it; and on the back it is olive-shaped, according to what is before placed.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the enflaming of the points.
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the points are inflamed with water, and they are plain like citrine, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the point between the auricle and the anus; and gently hold the cauterization with the help of God so as not to turn.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much into the front, otherwise it will be too harsh for the awl, and the fire cautery should be made according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two cauterys on each leg at the tip of the knee; and let the cautery be long, one in front of the groin and the other behind, perpendicular to the leg; and leave the cauterys to remain for a long time to cure, as the awl is able to; after the cure of the other cures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and absorptive virtues in the stomach and intestines are swollen and cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient very suffering and with strong virtue, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or on the small intestine, around it; and four cauterys should be made subtle at all the small cautery clavicle subtle, and two cauterys should be made on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	When you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, perform the cauterization on the point, and the cauterization on each hole, and the punctures on the stomach of the great belly, because the cure is profitable when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of the hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are either fundamentally, or one or more, and are old and large, and consist of cold and moist corrupt humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and if cauterized, it does not profit much, if I make cauterizations: III on the back of the spine, which is entirely deflected and crooked, and the cauterization on the bowels II doses; and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the meat is not cooked, and the face swells, then the face on the great cauterization on the stomach, as it is said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the gallbladder at all the cauterizations clavile; and leave the cauterization over long tens.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the shoulder until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the chondrositis which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat thelul, if the fire cautery looks like a raser, and then put it completely on the treated thelul; and leave as much of your hand as the cauterization reaches to the vein opening, and if there is no thelul, cauterize once or twice as we have said; after treating wounds as soon as they are healthy; and if you use a large cautery on the chest, it will give more help.
de plaie mal curee	The wound that was not properly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear tightening or opening, we will tell you in their language, if they come to illness that cannot be healed by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no fistula, and it is awake and gutty with corrupted moisture, if you provide total care, and keep the whole tent safe, and make sure you save as much of the tent as possible.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After scraping the cauterization that seems like a rasping tool, and drawing it out through the fistula according to the quantity that enters, and then resumes the cauterization as long as the corss is porridge and corrupted are ars, once, or II or III, according to the amount of blood; and you will be given an injection of nerf that is inquired, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	The first line of the text translates to: "If the fistula would reach the course of the vein and the intestine, if it were caused by these wounds, and only done for the purpose of the gut, and think that it is not a serious matter; then cure the wound as much as it is healthy, and if the leus are seen, and the materials are long bones, then assess that the wound is completely healed; and if the materials are not long bones, assess that the wound is only there, and corroded the bone at its root; and then, as we will say in this case.
de la maladie des reins	The second line of the text translates to: "of the disease of the kidney
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of childbirth comes on, and it is accompanied by large ventosity, and there is no woman available, then it is necessary that you cauterize the wounds on both sides at the clavicle that we have mentioned earlier; and if we cauterize in a line, there will be three cauterizations in a row, and they will provide more assistance.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is full and weak due to childbirth and moisture, if the midwife retains the urine, then you should cauterize in the part where the urine comes out of the bladder, either on the left or right side, and each one should be cauterized like a penis; and you should also cauterize the back of the bladder, or if you wish, at the back; and the cauterizations should be made according to the form mentioned earlier.
de la marris	Of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marsh is cold and wet, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, they feel great pain: therefore it is necessary to make three cauteries along the belly, as we have said or cauterization of the vesicle, and deflower the back; and if it is a clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hedgehog
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the hip of the hedgehog, and for this reason if it becomes motionless from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the legs are in different departments, if it comes that you cauterize the patient on the hip of the hedgehog at the cauterization like a circle, and go before the leg turning around the hip so that the hip is inside the circle; and if it is the cauterization like those that have been made on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, make three olive-sized cauterizations and let them be as large as the others; and the cure will be as soon as it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary to purge the patient of large humors from fetid pills or other bone-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the manner of cauterization is according to two methods: it means to combine burning medicines and cauterize with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	1. The fire cautery, if done correctly, should be performed in three ways: that is, the cauterizing iron should be placed according to this form, and it should make deep and good penetration, and there should be a space of an inch between each cauterization mark on the hair, and it should be olive-shaped; never should the cauterizing iron be placed on the base of the hair, because it can cause four such marks according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	2. And if you see, if the cauterization is done with the circular iron that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hair; but do it in a different way, so that the circles contain the entire hair, and all the points are evenly spaced.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is how one treats sciatica when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach the thigh or knee.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And when the pain reaches the thigh and knee, one should cauterize there where the pain is felt, either on the ankle or in the heel, on the side that is least used; and if it is the cutaneous cauterization, and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to two points or less than an inch away, then it should be cauterized at the point where the pain is felt, which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is in the groin and moves towards the thigh, then perform a fire cautery using a circular or cuttle cautery; and take good care of all your cauteries so that you do not burn too much of the cautery but burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause further harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen others who performed cautery on the ankle and did not release it until the leg was completely swollen, the foot, and the toes, and they were noticed and corrupted in all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the stomach, which caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts assembled, make a burn in one and the other according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the surgeon said in the burn of the thigh, according to this manner, make it thus and so at the end as big as some nail heads or less, and so by interlacing and so each interlaced is over the other like a nail, and they should be like noses, and have the main chain of well-made iron; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be washed as long as it is red and glistening, and then place it on the handle of the male catheter, and make it bend once to the cauterized point; and leave it for once the cautery re-enters and leaves three jags; and then apply ointment, and leave the wound open long tent; after the cure of the dressing as long as it is sound.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of its pain, and if we see little used; and all this is the burns that can be endured, and either they scar or not.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The first sentence to translate is: "Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After the patient has been anesthetized with the hot iron around the hip, and presses their hand on the hot iron; after allowing it to cool between the two circles of the heated awl which is heated in the fire I pot, and leaves it for an hour in the cold, and suffers from the patient's pain and the burn and the scar of the awl.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the burn is like that of fire; and when the burn has been passed, use the instrument to lift the awl handle gently, and leave it for three days, and remove as much as there is blackness in the burn; and then let it remain for three days until the sweat comes out; and this will be helpful after the cure of wounds as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	When the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that is shaped according to what you have done in the hair; and this is the way of the hot tool, and I have written it or treated about the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Prepare acid and live charcoal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in the new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	If there is a small hole that can be sharpened with a razor and can be inserted; then take some of the other pot, well-ground, and add alum and charcoal and softened limestone as much as you have two of the powders you will have in your hand; and leave it until it drips down with ague or can be poured, then take all of this, and grind it with alum and charcoal as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	When it is in the stomach and remains alive in a state of delirium from the medicine and cauterization of other parts, it makes a work like fire, and if other medicines are used, such as well-cauterized hazel from tesisie and miel anacardi and chalz with soap, all these things melt together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galiens tells us of a cure where some were cured of the pain of the hazel and sciatica, and the wound, and he says that no other cure is needed, and that it was healed in one go as soon as this cure was made, and they were bathed just like he instructs us here after.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And then, in a similar manner, you should prescribe green and dry leaves to be chewed, and the dung with a little grease, and apply it to the shoulder, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and wrap it; and leave it for three hours, according to the quantity that the patient does not feel the tightness anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then, I will let it enter a bath as long as the chest is not fully raised, and then I will let it enter the bed, and the pain will leave entirely and be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	I advise that no one should use such a cauterizing medicine after the evacuation of the chest.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with the horn of a goat, if it helps; and it must be done in part manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the fat and make it into oil, and put it in the fat that is between the little finger and the other which is called the fascia.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dry goat hair, and burning it at the fire until it is charred, and then putting it on wool, and leaving it as long as it is stained; and repeat this several times, until you think by sensation that it will reach the skin, and that the pain will cease; and this method of cauterization is called "goat cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	The pain from the back of the door
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes from the back, whether by touching or drumming or due to too much evacuation, or due to the appearance of cold expanded matter, none of these appearances is worth cauterization, rather it is for the one who has just received cold infusion.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the patient has been deodorized with fetid pills or other substances, that you apply them to the back of the patient, where the pain is located, three lines of the enche, and in each line V cauterization or more according to the skill and quantity that the patient can bear; and it should be done according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see, make III cauterizations or IIII on the clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often affects many children, and the signs of its beginning are that they become stiff in the limbs as they grow older, and weaker; and you see the spines of their backs and the appearance that comes from other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and it is cured, if it is cauterized at the point of that kind according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cauterization makes every part of the spine equal.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if it is cauterized at the end of the spine at the point where the two points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the patient until they are healthy according to what we have said, and you understand that you will not perform a fire cauterization on a bone that is in the spine of the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is caused by moisture that has expanded to every member of the body, and when pain comes with a chill, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is of cold cause and medicines do not cure it, then it is cured by fire cauterization in this way: make the cut on the side of the joint that is in pain, and the cauterization should be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	If it appears that you are pricking at the face, then you should perform the burning procedure throughout the entire burning as claimed "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pain spreads to the shoulder and other joints, and this happens many times, then you should perform the burning procedure on each shoulder III or IV of each part, throughout the entire olive oil cauterizing; and if you have more skill, but do not hold your hand for as long as the pain allows.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pain descends to the shoulder and back, then you should apply the burning procedure that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	When the pain is in the hands, if it does not disappear after two lines of the foxglove, and if there is still no pain, if it is burned at each joint and on the nail of the hand, and if the pain comes from the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and govern the patient's behavior with the physician and prescribe medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good behavior and purge the fumes, it will be healthy under God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the face
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in wrinkles, and the blood drops down like rain and is newly, if it comes to be healed when you see it, do not let him drink any of his belly; and use things that lessen the belly, so that the belly descends from his belly; then make him lie on his back between your hands, and command him to touch his eyelid as soon as he has relieved himself, and draw it to his eyes, and mark where the rupture is on the bone of the shoulder, and in all signs that it seems like a half circle around the whole corps; then wash the cauterization with the form that is here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and feels cold.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then smooth the wounds on your leg; and the surgeon will stain his hand to ensure they do not re-open; and properly work the thighs with the patient, and put the cautery sign on all your hand, and hold it correctly and as far as you can reach the bone, and if you do not reach the first time, then continue another time until you touch the bone; and be gentle so that the pus does not come out when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the surgeon does not die or another.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know that when you do not come to the bone with the cauterization, your efforts are in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	It is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to the size of the bone, and also great for adults; after three days, cure the wound with leather as long as the burn is still hot; after treating other ointments as long as it is healthy, and apply 40 days of ointment on his back so that the wound is well scarred; and it is necessary that the incisions be made far apart, so that they do not smell when he grows up.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty years, when he wishes to rise, he will find a well-made belt that holds him up for forty more days; and he should rest, so that he works quickly and does not have too much intoxication from drinking and eating, and does not brag; and when he makes this teaching, it is completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after the treatment of cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the stomach
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other stomachs and are known, and you see that they are not increasing, one should repeat the cauterization according to its quantity, and it is the third part of the keur; after the treatment according to what we have said; and no of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But the first sign of the bone is the fracture and I make a line for the length of the fracture, and another for the width, and hold your hand to all the cauterization clamps.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are less severe and more painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no member.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes from no member, whether from chill or wound, and this pain lasts long, and the cure with medicine is of no use, then it must be cauterized at the cauterization that is called "points", and the cauterization according to the length of the member and the width and the strength and the location of the torsions and the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first burn is not severe, it is well; if it is otherwise, restart another burn on that part, because it is customary for a member to die where it is touched, and you must do the burns as long as the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of masculinity
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The men are aided once by burning, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the burning, when the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we said in the division, and does not hesitate or grow tired, and you doubt that corruption will spoil all the patient, then I make the burns on the head: I cut off the head, and the other on the front near the end of the cheeks; and they touch the corners, and the rear to the hamstring; and it lasts as long as your hand holds the burn, and as long as the discharges issue forth so that the vapors of the large humors can issue forth; and the burn is made on the mice according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	1. If the wound is scattered everywhere; it is clearly evident that if you cauterize with these cauteries we have mentioned or chief, and the cauterization is not, and the cauteries are on the spine of the neck, and the cauteries are on the spine of the back, and the crupie and the other delices, and the II sus the II espaules; and the II sus the tendrons dou pis, and the I sus each joint of the hands and the feet, and the fosses of the hands; and you wear ners that are sus lou derrien calcant, that you do not burn them; and never made a cauterization on the os of the point, and the other on the stomach, and the other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	When more fire cauteries are made, the patient benefits more and it helps them; when more fire cauteries are made, the patient does not feel pain in the cauterization as they should because their body is already corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the shoulder with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healthy, then the cauterization is made on the member according to its size and thickness; then the treatment of ointments as they become healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never has it been done that a burn is made on the hand, arm, and back, at the end of a nerve that does not move the member, and if it is not known where the members and the ends of the moving nerves are in the body; and no one ever enters into conflict unless they are aware of the members and the ends of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	of burns
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "burns" is aroused, and the art of medicine does not help, then it is cauterized with a cautery, according to the amount of the flesh that burns, until the blister is ostee (popped) and clear in color; then the treatment of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain flakes, and sand of colic and sand of alondre, for each part; and all are assembled, and dressed with a bandage, and applied to the body as much as it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of syphilis by burning
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the sore appears at the beginning, and you see it stop, if the burning is done with the fire cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the wise say that it is burned in the environment of the sore; and I do not think it is bad, because I doubt that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have always wanted this to happen once; and the most correct thing is that it is burned all around, with the cautery called "circumcision," as we have said in our mouth about cauterization.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the flesh that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays its death either due to excessive waste or too much pain when the patient is old (too weak), or lack of blood, or tightness; and you see it hurting to die: then, the cauterization is done by pricking with small cauterizing instruments; afterwards, it is left alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hurts to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it hurting at all the cauterization, if the cauterization is hot, then its form is like this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the environment of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has perceived the heat, and such cauterization that the patient feels it defers in some way that the course of the purging is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, when it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease called "corrodens", and it is nothing more than a corroding of the member, because it eats the members as it does the dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the leg that can suffer cauterization with fire, therefore sharpen the cauterizations clavile as small and large as necessary, according to where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts until you remove all corruption, and nothing remains of it, that everything which is corrupted is not osteit.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then it is left for three days, and it is put on the burned parts with oil, suffering boils with oil as long as the cauterized parts are not burned through and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of burns caused by fire.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy char does not appear, it is good; and if not, continue the cauterization on the parts that are still corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this disease has never been treated with medicine in the part of cauterization with fire; but all cauterization with fire is more helpful, and I have already said the treatment of the medicine ague in the division: take what you have skill in.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the porings that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it has happened that the feet have been affected by a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that must be treated with a cold.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatment of this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is known as fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is when you heat the foot until it is as hard as a needle of vulture, and it is made of iron according to the size that can penetrate the claw of all parts, and have subtle margins; after you put the fire on the claw, and turn your hand totally around the claw as it comes to the end of the claw; and it leaves for three days until it begins to excrete milk; then I make a poultice of boiled malva flowers with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the claws will be separated from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat the wound with ointment, applying it as soon as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	If the wound becomes infected many times, and appears in hands and fingers, then it is necessary to have a fire cautery. This is done by taking a thorn or iron nail, or a feather, and tying it around the nail and the nailhead, which is known as covering warts. Then, the thorn is placed so that it covers everything, then a hot poultice is placed on top, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand as you turn until the edge of the thorn touches the root of the nail head, and you will find the hot fire near the root. Then, allow the malaide to have a little mordication of the hot fire for an hour; then leave it alone, and it will fall off at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	I make another after, as you are aware of all that is in the course, then cure the wounds that encroach on the skin.
li cure dou trembler	it trembles
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If any tremble from cold, or fever, or other cause, it is necessary that you make four cauteries or four on the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization with a needle, and one at the stomach with olive oil; if it allows the trembling to cease, and the health improves from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	small pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No time ever appears due to bruises or pustules that come from large corrupt materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary to cauterize at first when they appear, a subtle cauterization with wool of marten, or if the point is held in fire, or from the root of Aristolochia long, or with the lenticular cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never are cauterizations made at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they do not grow hair in front, but they are disfigured by the superfluity that comes, and they are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is tied off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great dislocations of blood from the artery that is tied off at the wound which comes to the pardefuers, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the fire cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a great grief to have to open the wound.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And when there is nothing, if you must put your index finger on the vein wound, and press as much as you can until it is quieted by your index finger, and no more pain; then put the olive-oil cauterys on the wound as many and large as they are all red; then I, or as great or small as the wound and the flesh around the artery is dry, and put the fire cautery on this vein where you hold your index finger, and hold the fire cautery until it is not restainched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If the fire cautery is completed as you tie your child's vein, and it stops, then quickly take another one that is hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do this one after the other until the nerve is no longer tight; and be careful not to burn the flesh, and avoid other harm coming to the patient; and remember that when the artery is not cut, it cannot immediately hurt as much as the artery becomes large, if it is not treated in one of the four ways we have mentioned: either by cautery or extraction, or by tightening with thread, or by medicines placed there to prevent pain; and let it be tied and extracted gently.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will carefully manage the remaining of the thread, whether it is by tying knots or placing things on fire, or other similar things, should not profit from it unless it is necessary.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is no other remedy or medicine, then he should put his index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and then firmly press until it is painful in the wound and in the vein; and he should not move much, but often move his finger to keep it cold so that it does not freeze and become numb and painful; and make sure to consult with those who are skilled in cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	For the first chapter of medicine, all diseases are discussed when it comes to cauterization or burning medicines, and their causes, effects, and forms of cauterizations; and I have written this chapter as the chief surgeon, and I will go into this chapter through my own way because it is lighter to write about these things.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	However, before I begin this, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	I warn you that you should not attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many methods of people come in treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have died so easily by the foresight of their disease, and the greatness of their evil; and these should be feared.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who say to you: "Wait, I am here"; and the disease is desperate.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It only requires that you allow those who come to you to have this way, but put more caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not trust too easily but rather wisely of the things you are certain about, and which you could have taken or lost; and use divination and indication in the cures of your diseases for health to be converted; and this will help you to this good reputation, glory, and memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three very thin threads, our Lords give you understanding and straightness, and if you will hope for the holy inspiration of her hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have commanded this chapter in indicating by chirurgy, according to the chirurgy of cauteries, which I have indicated for the head joints, because you will find it more lightly than other things.
dou chief plein d’aigue	A full head of hair with sweat
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Scars that this disease comes from the child many times in the mother's womb, and when it is pulled too hard on the head of the child, and never has it come from a cause that is not answered that we do not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease befall anyone but children, and in these cases it led to death; and therefore I think that it would be wise to delay the surgery in certain treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen children with fevers that were high, and the head engorged every time it was touched; and I thought that this was due to inflammation, and the inflammation being assembled at the bone where the sinus is, between the knee and the bone; and the dislocations are such when the inflammation is between the knee and the bone, and the abscesses are small, so you cut off the head of the child with a wide incision; and so long as the inflammation persists, so is the form of the spathe:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more concentrated, and the abscess is larger, then I will make incisions in this manner: this form.
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture has reached the bone, and you see the commissures of the chief overturned in each part, and the wound gushes out when you press with your hand on the deden, and it is not clear: if you must cut off the head III incisions in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And then after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After removing the dressings and powders, and applying wine and oil, and leaving it for five days; then remove the dressing, and treat the wound with compresses and poultices, and leave the shoulder even, and then make the meat of the dry flesh as little moist as possible until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to look or open the widest part of the abscess, and the gathering of the angle; for it is never in front; never on the back; never on the side; and never in the lower part.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, open the abscess according to your ability, and the gathering of the angle, and you will make it according to what you have; and do not block the artery, and come out with blood if the patient dies from loss of blood and evacuation of pus.
de reume	of the remedy.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is any disease called "cataract" in the eyes or ear, and the disease is ancient, and the cure by medicine does not profit, then it is cured if it is cauterized with this, which covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	1. It is therefore necessary, can you see the eyes, that the patient holds his head steady; after rubbing the face with a rough cloth as much as possible, until the arteries are visible, then hold the head with both hands on all the cloth; then look at the eyes, and the signs on both sides are after the ears, and few are returned; then sign the eyes that they are swollen, then press one and the other with a sponge of hot water as much as possible, until the size comes near to the bone, and that is by the wide distance of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	2. And if you see, dip the sponge in hot water and press on the artery, and cut as much as possible, like this or that.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is pricked, if it continues to bleed without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at touch, then measure the quantity of blood that flows out, and say it is three drops; then make a small incision and insert a needle into the bone; and if it is six drops or more, and perhaps a little more or less depending on what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery, then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without causing pain, then close the wound and sew it, and care for the wound with antiseptic soap until it is healed.
de emigrainne	From migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When migration comes, and the eye is hurt, by moisture from tears and sweat in the temples and often it seems that something else is wrong, and it is treated with ways of medicinal cures and everything does not help, if we strangle the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them if the patient causes his temples to bleed, and understands the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is quickly repaired in no man who is too impatient; and if it is repaired, then draw the collar of the patient from his hair, then rub the neck with some rough cloth, and wash the neck with hot water until the artery opens clearly; then take the spumous form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then gently burn the light leather until you feel the artery, then raise it to the top of your nails, and take out as many threads as are loose from each part; and if the artery is subtle, if it turns at the tip of the uncinate, then the cope of that part follows according to the number of II chiés.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cope, then it will not jump at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And take out five sancdes of VI c/, just three; and if the artery is large, then it will lie in two threads of a double strong silk, which does not come before the wound, and comes off with the sanc; then cut off the superfluity that is between the II liiens in that hour, and then, if you see, if the cautery dou cautere cutellaire is as the bone as the chiés are copez; and this is the greatest work, if the malaides have no fever and it is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	The fire cautery is helpful for ending moisture: because it is more effective on moisture than other methods.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	It is necessary to use the extraction of arteries that fills the vein with soft cloth and puts on well-made tents; and when you loosen it, if you cure it with dry medicines that make water salty, and tents as long as it is healthy; and if there is no cut to the artery as much as you can, if you have to use the leather of vitriol and stretch it in your hand that it is not stained; and if you don't have this present, if you put it on your vein as much as it freezes, and wash it with cold water as often as it can, and draw it if necessary; and what is more dangerous and lighter in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein that is trenched by this cautery twice as long as the other, but the trenching should be well spaced to last longer without causing more pain.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the wound is too large, it holds less blood.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two punches, at least one that is large enough, and then when you see the two holes closing, heat them as much as they can reach the bone, and close the vein in the two holes; and they should be spaced apart between the two points because it is not safe to use this cauterization for everything; and this is the shape of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes fall on the veins that are being cut by the sharp point of the hot iron, and it does not profit at all from medicine, and you see the face of the patient writhing, and you hear the sound of the pulse if it is strong, and the papers are wet and moist as if the paper of the pulp is cut, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, if it is possible for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And it was called the ancient "bruised cure," and that is what you should do to the patient who has this disease, which is either on the head or front, then make three incisions or front equally according to the length of the front; and one of the incisions should be made using a scalpel at the angle of the front, and the others should be made using the costelz (scissors) through the papers, and keep away from the incision of the arteries that are caused by the costelz through the papers; and separate your hand from the continuation of the second mandible, and each wound should have three units at the joints; and you will have a piece of sponge and moisten the cloth with the blood of the sanc, then pull out the spatulum agut of the two parts that are like this:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	1. This is the first sentence to translate: "des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If blood flows in the first burn with the instrument called "cultellary", which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, do not cut too deeply, and this is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge of the scalpel towards the cartilage at the knee, and the blunt end towards the bone, and stop bleeding as it reaches the first burn.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the veins that descend from the knee as much as the incision is continuous until it opens the knee; then draw out the blood evenly, and express the leek for the blood taken; then put in each wound a small piece of soft cotton, and wrap around with soft cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep the wound from getting wet; and when you remove the linen, apply a large amount of cold aloe with olive oil, and other remedies that are used for wounds until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu com
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no cautery by fire is habitual, and you see the hairs thinned and broken, and the eyes swollen; and the skin burned, and the patient in great pain, and the malady severe; therefore, be cautious of these accidents that these materials and this cautery only cause many wounds, and the cure that it gives is if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it comes to pass that you command the patient to shave his face, then make a deep cut along the front of his face, and another larger one on the side.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin the cut from the left temple to the right temple, making sure to cut through the bone; then pull your hand away from the temples as they move in the mouth; and when you have exposed the bone, place all the blood on a sponge, and then insert cotton between the two lips, and use linen; then wrap the wound with soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, and take care not to cause an abscess; when it is healed, if it comes to pass that you rub the bone as much as it hurts and begins to neckle, then the treatment of things that cause excoriation, which make char, use char.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and eight parts of linen thread, and make a paste; and apply it to these wounds to prevent infection for all.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the earwax
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that comes out of the ears is one of the four things: grains, fleas, mineral piercings, or similar things; or seeds, like peas, beans, and similar things; or something that flows out, like mucus, saliva, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it comes out of the ear through the piercing or in any other way that does not stay in the ear, and does not grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the wound, and there is no drop of violet oil or thread oil, then you will extract it; and I make the incision, and it fans out the nostrils as it is extracted, and I put on the ear pieces of linen or wool; and the ear is at the end.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	This treatment often comes out; and if it does not come out, then it is extracted with forceps as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with forceps, it's good; if not, then extract it with a small incision and double needle; and if it does not jump out, then make a small incision in the ear and bite off the end of the candle or earhole, and fan out the part that is inside the ear wax so that it can enter with the ear; then the hole will be formed, as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, then take some lint and put it inside the ears, and do not use any instrument that can hurt it, and put a small piece of cotton outside; then press the wax with the wound or whatever it is, and make the hole.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If it does not come out of all these things that we have said, if you continue to press on the ear even though it is swollen and spasms, and the manner of pressing if it is that you first sharpen the blade of the scalpel, and draw out the blood according to the strength of the blade, then hold the blade between your hands and turn the ear towards the opposite side, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where the fat is or the ear depends; and let the cut be as a moon, as you approach the point, then the bone according to your power, and the suction holds in your mouth; and the cure as it becomes healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is grain that is in and it swells, then administer the extraction; and if it cannot be emptied, then apply the suction gently according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make the incision if you think the grain is swollen by moisture in the ear, until you have done it many times; then pull out the pieces with your fingers and with sugar, as we have said, if the extractions are allied.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear, therefore, that it is necessary to use the physician's hand in the ear, and open it wide with a piece of cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let's say on that same ear where the arrow is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps for that reason, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it doesn't, then take several pricks according to the length of your arrow, and heat them; and put the salve on one side of the ear, and let it run down from there onto the other ear; and continue this pricking in the same spot until the arrow is completely out, and when it jumps, it will be completely out; and if you see, if you take one joint, and burn one of the bones in the ear, and the other bone hold in fire as long as the pain is the greatest; then make another part of other pricks as long as the arrow is completely out, until the pain is completely gone, as we have said in the prick.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the tooth, if it is small, like a pea and similar, it can be treated as we have said in the division; but if it is large, one can feel it, after adjusting the forceps; and this is the lighter thing to do in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of the ear rings from the ears, if you treat it as we have said in the division and use distillations, and the care is not effective if you look at the ear to the sun: if there are no holes, if you open them with subtle forceps, and if there are, if you take the noose of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be tight but wide and smooth.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And cut off the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then form it into a cone; do this often as often as you can.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not yield to the pressure, then squeeze them into a cotton cone as we have said in the incision; and if they do not soak in as we have said, then apply distillations that the ancients have used in the decision of the verse, and you will find or mix your oils and medicines with them; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, whatever form it takes, so be it:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	1. And let silver or gold be poured into the holes, and then strained through a proper instrument made of silver; and if you see take the receiver and wrap it around the pointed end of the cotton; then let your oil or juice flow out, and whatever you see of your medicines in the cauldron, and the cauldron should be in the ear; then blow gently through the receiver all over the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or comes from the ear; and it will feel cold to the patient, and so is the distillation if it is not too hot; and keep it from being too cold, as the medicine will not be effective if it is.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the coldness of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some earache; and this same thing happens due to coldness of the ear, or a cut in the ear, and these colds never occur in the ear, if one cannot see; and no time has ever come when the pertussis was not seen, and it is well seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	1. That which comes in front of the ear, if it cannot be seen, is a sign of a serious illness in many cases; and when you see this, you must put the ear of the maiden in the sun; look closely: if you see the oedema apparent, then the swelling has completely covered this part of the face, and this is the form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	2. And also and suddenly put your hand in front and behind everything, if it does not bleed the ear; if the oedema is of the cheek or neck of the ear, then take a gentle hold with your fingers, and lift lightly, as long as the pain is not too severe.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the tonsils are swollen in the ear, then take a soft, light rasping tool and gently scrape and burn a small part of it, then place it inside the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the inflammation that your ear feels is painful, carefully pierce it, and do not hurt the ear drum; then put a tent made of Egyptian ointment into the ear, and let it stay overnight.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not remove any wound as long as the pain is subsided, or if you put a tent and moisten it with pinkish ointment and powdered vitriol dust; and if you see that the ear is swelling, then take out the tent and move another soft tent made of rose oil and wax to cover it as much as it can swell; then cure it when it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	When the dislocation occurs, if a wet sponge is plunged and quickly cooled, and placed on the ear, and other treatments are used that are treated for the dislocation of the shoulder which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper roll
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	That is the one that comes out of paper when the hairs are wet and dry, if you stretch them with needles and tweezers, and place on a piece of gypsum from its roots; then put the limb in a flask of vitrol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without cutting it, if the cautery is made with a subtle cautery lenticulaire, and the cauterizer after the incision is enough; and they are often repaired, none of their roots grow out; and when they are cauterized by fire, their roots are burned and do not grow back.
de la gresle	Of the greese
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, things come in papers that seem gritty in form and hardness, and for this the disease is called "granule," and it is an assembly of large moisture in the paper of these and elsewhere; the treatment is as follows: first, if the granule is still on both sides, it is a light thing to know; then make it wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take tweezers, and close.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot feel the paper close with your fingers, if it does not hurt the patient; and if the assembly is large, if it is stitched, and the cure as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, if it does not make any force, because it restores the rest of the joint in order.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	When the snow descends towards the ear hole, if reversed, and the snow is grasped with tweezers, and the cloth is pressed from both sides; and if the paper is moved by incision, it causes no harm; when the snow is placed on the oil of bitter salt, and cures the limb that is misaligned as much as the malady allows.
de la graisse des eulz	of the grease of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that becomes entangled in the threads of papers, and this happens to more and more people, and causes pain to their hairs, and they come to the catharsis in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears are on their hairs; and for this they lie down with their faces turned away, and sleep, and their papers become wet with the exinach that the enflamement and appearance have caused.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	When you press on the joint with your hand and feel the exertion within it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And how to open the joint if it is the patient's intention to cut through it; then take a cloth and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exertion contained in each part, then put it on; and press with both hands, so that the exertion is assembled within the circle; then make a circle of moisture at the wound, cutting a large notch, no larger than the wound you make at the point of entry; and make the cloth as wide as you can see the exertion; and in other ways, exertion comes from the notch, according to the shape of a greasy, pimpled piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	1. Pull the hair all around your body with a piece of cloth hanging between your two hands, and turn your left and right hands as much as possible; and make sure you do not pull too hard, so that you do not hurt yourself, and do not bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	2. If the hair does not open at the beginning of the cut, lightly open it as much as possible when it appears; then pull it out as we have said, and then wet the cloth with water and apply it to the wound, and press gently.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	3. And if such men who bore their seal and put on to corrupt the moisture that is dried up.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the doctor when he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess comes to the eye, then the doctor uses soothing remedies as long as he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the paper's hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers grow hairs other than their nature, and are wetted, if they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as common tears and softening of the paper and albumen, until it is caused by the destruction of the hairs; and the doctor treats according to four methods: either by burning together with fire, or according to medicine, depending on what is in front of or in the chapter of cauterization, and is made by cutting and stitching or by needles, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	1. It is necessary that you put the handle of the patient's arm in your mouth, then turn the paper of the oil to your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then insert an awl into every hole of the file; and let the margin of the paper or the hair that comes from these hairs be on the left side of the paper, and turn the file to the right until all the hairs are aligned; then cut off the part of the paper that is opposite to the hair, adjusting the hair evenly, across the entire suture, from the largest to the smallest; then extract the file, and put a small piece of cotton and linen on the paper after the paper, then sew the figure according to the quantity that you see rising the paper that is marked with dots; and it should be like this.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If a part of the body has a wound that requires a large amount of paper according to its size, then cut out all the sheets according to the lines you have written, and start with a large sharp scissors at the beginning; and one of the holes near the natural hair growth in its enlargement by a root, then pull out the root at one of the two angles, then burn it completely; then assemble the two edges together with a stitch made with an awl to all the fine thread of the fabric, and take out the sand, and make air to the superfluity of threads on the two corners for anything gluing, if you see this done; and if not, then leave the stitch and the threads until three or four days; then cure the wound with the costure of things drying and constricting, because the paper relieves from the pain and assembly of the wound, but the costure is muedre (if it is said by the old one), and it is overrated with fear; and if in another way: and it is that you see the paper of a figure which is also like the felle of mirte, as we have counted, at three or four holes, according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then comes he who surpasses with equal force according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the nails, and the thing is not even, then take a needle or a thread of about the same size, and draw it through the hole; and take another thread of about the same length for the large arm, and a shorter one for the small, and assemble the threads evenly; then gently press with your hand evenly, and gently sew all the edges where you have made the cut, as we have experienced, then stitch the lips of the wound by sewing, and treat it as soon as possible; and if an abscess comes to your incision, so that it is relieved and calmed; and never has the hair of the paper been converted: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The patient's gums are cut in this way: and if you fold the paper according to what I have said, and then make the gums thus long and thin as the paper and the threads are; and hold the ends with the teeth; then assemble the two and the other subtly above the paper of the oil, and tighten the gums in the parts formed; and leave no corners, and the lip which is stretched will die and turn black and rot, as long as it hangs on it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, if the force is great, then treat as soon as possible; and when the gum is healed, and if raised the paper, and no more hair will stick; and this is the form of the two gums you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and thin:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The first sentence to translate is: "The dislocation of the shoulder is such that you must use a fine needle, and a suture of silk fine and subtle; then assemble the heads and not knot them gently, and make the ends of the threads long; then order the other fine silk thread to be pulled through the chase, and not knot the heads; then place the malice's head in your mouth; and if the dislocation is to be seen, it is a subtle one and small, then pull the needle all through the chase at its root, and make it visible on paper as you trace over the natural hair; then pluck the hair until it reaches the chase, and pluck in the chase the hair, if there are I, II, III, or more; then withdraw your hand as the hair grows all over the chase with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	1. If the chase is treated and the hair does not come with it, then if you entrust the chase to the other end of the thread as you have ordered, as long as the chase comes out fuller and you see it through the sight of the oil; therefore, if you entrust the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, as long as the hair grows in its place and gives birth to the chastity; and if the hair is short, then accompany it with one long hair from the cheeks nature, and take it with the one you let go, as long as it is elongated and then tie it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the oil's fatness
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, known as "aleacrati" or oil coming, occurs in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes from wounds, or cuts, or burns, and in similar ways.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of the healing is to cut off the suture, and remove the lips of it, and put on bandages of linen, and leave it as long as it is sound; and nothing else should be used in the cure of it from things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease worsens than the first; but the work of things that soften, like fenugreek; and the root of Aqua or Alttee and the seed of Lin are cooked, and ointments made from them are not found in any of the oils, and they envelop a tent, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is if you guard that it does not sound like according to its form before; and these wounds that we have said are no worse than this disease, that it does not recur according to its form before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	From the cheek that comes in the oil.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease called "azocrat" is truly called "azocrat," and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from a wound and a burn and a cautery and things similar; and the sight of the eye when you prick it is that if you have a needle, if it has two threads, and the thread in the cheek, and it feels like a left lame, so that the threads come to the shoulder of the cheek; then the cheek is at the end of all the needle, and the cap at the large spatule.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if the paper is misaligned according to what it should be, that is good; but if not, then take a ruler and place it on the paper, and turn the paper, and make as many furrows as the paper allows; and let the shoulders of the two angles of the incision you made be like those of a letter that does not have "I griesche"; then straighten them according to the quantity that their shoulders are wide, of the one that holds the paper, then adjust the displaced parts, and make them equal to a thread of linen; then apply the remedies we have said for the mollifying medicines and tents, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	When the disease comes from frost or friction or burning, if it is necessary to remove a frosted hair from the paper, according to what is before; then cut between the two legs of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the shape of the disease, because it is different in shape, and the skilled masters are able to make all things return to their natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary to remove and excise in more positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The paper should be soaked.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. When this cauterization comes to the hands of women in such a way that the paper on it is stuck with white oil, and cannot move or perform its natural tasks, then it comes that you cut the tip of a razor with the paper left on the paper, and lift it up; and the tweezers, as long as you cover what is attached to the subtle spumous substance, which is neither too much nor too thin, so that the patient can suffer neither the spumous substance too much nor the oil bleeding; and your incision, which you scrape of that assembled one, lightly, so that the paper reforms according to its natural form; and it becomes healthy for all assembled, and never in the acrid cold oil, and the levant it with cool sweet oil, and then put a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and put fine oil-softened wool in abundance of ointment; and afterwards, after the third day use cold and other things as long as it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the bone of the elbow
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways in which the bone of the elbow can be: it is nervous and resembles a hard stone, and another that is not nervous but resembles a frozen mudstone, which when touched with iron and cooked with pins, if it cannot be opened; and both resemble the great terror, and grow little by little until the entire vision and light and movement of the bone are lost.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision if the patient places his head in your hand, then he operates on the bone with small forceps, and gently lift the bone with the pincers, and place it at the edge; then take a needle, and insert the horsehair, or sheep hair, or cowhair, and the strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and the thread through the bone, and perforate all the needle, and tie the bone with a thread and place it at the edge, and scrape off all the hair from the costeit of the bone which extends the silk and the wool from the chief, then cut off the remaining in the root of the elbow with subtle and small forces, and leave the natural or the arm, if by the incision there come no tears; and never has the bone been set in the elbow only, and at the end, as we have said; then it is scarred on all the spatumile so that the form is:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure the shaved part does not touch the raw skin and does not break; then, after cutting, grease a small piece of hemp cloth with oil, and apply it with gentle pressure, and leave it until the next day; then, treat the one that needs to be treated as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not very nervous, and you do not thrust the needle, and the edges cannot enter, this appearance of a nail of medicines is often treated; and I have seen it in division, and if you see it, use oil of medicine, and take a light piece of shaved nail according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	1. And carefully cut the tendon, and if you see that it does not soften and the ration is pressed, then distill from your mouth into the oil made of litargire and red coliere rouge and seil broiet, and it stinks to the other day; then resume the other incision according to this same work, as long as it is completely softened.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. If nothing is contrary to the oil, as with an abscess, then the milk, and first treat the abscess as soon as it is healthy, then resume the incision as before, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the flesh of the arm appears dark in the oil due to great intoxication, and in a part but not all, where tears do not come; then it seeps into the oil that is red like blood, which is made by inflammation.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the cheek that was pricked by the thorn
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And some men's cheeks have never been red, and they cut the thorn and wrap it in papers and tie it with thread, and it looks like a rose of balsam; and if the wounds are such that the patient puts his hand in the salve, then he pushes the wounds, and cuts off all the red as much as possible, and holds them in place with force; then cut the first one, and cut all of them according to the end, and make sure you do not bleed the oil on the wound; and the incision of a small amount like we said in the incision of an inguinal hernia and small forces of coi on oste lou sebel, if it forms after this chapter as we have shown; and when the incision is completed and all the red is cut off, if you put oil of wool or distill red blood and resembles medicines corrosive, and put on the oil with a piece of cloth with a pinch of mud, if it is assured of aphrodisiac chaut; and if it does not need anything, and the without chaus comes over you, and you doubt aphrodisiac chaut, if leaves the oil and cures aphrodisiac of things soothing aphrodisiac chaut; then return to your wound as soon as it is healthy, and then make sure the cuts are placed in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you apply the cure to every weak point of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in fire; and do not thrust your hand into any of these furnaces as long as you see that the member is not affected by that furnace.
des voines des eulz	of veins of hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If there are red veins that are covered with oil, and they touch the eye and cause it to bleed.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, it is necessary that you first look at the oil as it appears, and if it is red, it is dangerous, and there is no other disease than this oil; therefore, it is done in this way: instruct the patient to put his head on your shoulder, then pull out those veins all over the body according to your knowledge, and make them subtle as in this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two incisions, one on each side of the chest according to this form.
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then use your fingers to remove the smaller veins, and wait until you can see them coming out; do not cut the oil with the points of your fingers, and perform this incision at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your incision so that you do not cut any larger veins; and when you have done this, distill the green and red oil into the wound to cure what is inside.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot cut all of it in that hour, make a plaster with the oil of things that calm the pain of the wounds, and leave some layers until the pain is calmed and secured against infection, then resume according to this method as soon as it is safe; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	From the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	He examines the fistula of the oil: if it is cured by cauterization and by burning hot medicine according to what I have said, and it is not healed, then it must be opened at the site of the abscess, and all the moisture that is in it should be removed as long as the wound is visible.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the wound is revealed, and you see corruption and blackening, if all the instruments of this case are made to fit; and it is called "sharp chief", and should be made firm in the chief, and should not be sharpened like a lime when it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	When the bend of the corrupt bone is set, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand for a short time as you check if the corruption is removed; and do this only once, then restore the bone with medicated ointments.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is swollen and painful, and the belly is also swollen, and it does not improve after 40 days, and there are no signs of infection, and no other cause can be found, then follow this procedure: if you cannot return the fistula to its original position according to this form, then remove the bone a second time using iron and medicated ointments. If the wound improves according to this form, and the head of the bone is at an angle of 3, and the fistula is softened as much as possible, then do as you see fit.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place the heel of the hand on the shoulder, and gently move your hand away from the ointment, then turn it completely until it pierces the bone and feels the pain as if you were holding its hand above the nape; and then restore the dry medicine leg as I have shown you, and when the child cries and hardens the legs, if the matter is in the nape, then it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of the ointment
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound is fully open and there is no relief in the nape, and it does not cause any discomfort or discomfort, then you must apply the ointment to the patient; then put on gloves or a handkerchief that does not hurt by squeezing, then put on the ointment made of aloe, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle, and then apply it to the wounds and dressings; if the dressings are too moist, double each one to IV, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount the patient has used; then squeeze out some hard buds, and resume the dressings to relieve the pain as much as possible; then remove the dressings and let the ointment dry and sleep overnight, and if you see that it is healing, that is good; if not, then remove the application and dressings and the ointment as soon as they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	A sudden tearing of the eyelid
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a sudden tearing occurs in the eyelid, it opens wide and reveals paper like grains of resin; therefore, cover the eyes and the ovary is such that you can insert an awl at the root of the part that is swollen and painful, then insert another awl where there is a double thread in the part of the lame; and make sure, and leave the first awl according to its position; then cut the double thread and take a part of the eyelid, and twist it well, then remove the awl and put some ointment on a large amount of pus; and leave it until the threads are connected with the eyelid, then care for things that are comfortable for the wound as long as the wound is healed; and never leave the wound unprotected by the eyelid, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs grow too long, if it is pricked at its base with a sharp instrument that comes from the oil, and the moisture is removed and the hair falls out, and it becomes healthy; then the hair is pulled out as soon as it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the oil's bowl
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not other than bowls assembled in the oil, resembling hot-flowing, and it is not hot; and the appearance of the dislocation if you make it seem that the patient lies on his side and straight, then take the head between your hands of II parts, and pull as much as you see the bowl coming to the desus at your hairs; then it is over, and it is clean and visible, and see the symptoms as they were; and if it does not descend, think that it is hot, and if the dislocation comes from the bowl is not assembled as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you place the patient's arm in your hands, then take a soft sponge and moisten it with the clear fluid on the corneal membrane; continue this until the bow is drawn out. When it is drawn out, if it drips into the cold, warm water or fenugreek syrup mixed with honey, or cold or fenugreek syrup alone, then treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the appearances of water in the division, and when it is necessary to perceive; if according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	The translation of the first line is: "It is necessary that you place the patient's arm in your crooked hands, being towards the light of the sun, and the healthy and tight oil lies; then put the paper of the oil on your left hand so that the hairs are to the left, or on your right hand so that the hairs are to the right; then take in your right hand, if the hairs are to the left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if the hairs are to the right; then place the point of the instrument at the coronet through the opening of a ring in the oil at the smallest part of the arm, then push the instrument called 'almagda' gently, and twist your hand as it pierces the oil's ring, and feel that almagda enters the empty space; and the measure of the almagda's hole should be at the edge of the measure of the spice that is in the prunes near the end of the nose; and this is the coronet of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornered skin, then put the instrument in the place where it is needed, and press the oil through a hole after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he becomes agitated now, if he sees the physician and the instrument before him.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After the patient has rested a little, and he becomes agitated again, open the second vessel, place the forceps with the instrument, and when it is firm and does not move, gently twist your hand around the handle several times; then take a piece of silk thread and lift the oil from the vessel.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then pour the oil into the wound, either rough or finely ground in oil of rose and a large amount of leeches, and anoint with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	1. Our, and those who are of our kind, place on with bread with much urine.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	2. And if it cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, since there are too many men with very hard hairs, then you must use the instrument called "alberit," which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	3. And pierce only the conjunctive, and do not cut too much, but make a subtle incision, then extract the amagda as we have said; and at the completion of the operation, the patient should lie down on his back in the dark room; and let him have lighter foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and follow his disposition as much as possible; then leave him in this state for a while, and make him see some things, and then reinsert it as soon as possible on the ninth day; and it is only necessary that you do this in the eye of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you remove it because the inflammation increases rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When the patient feels pain, move the oil ahead of the seventh day, and address the one who calms the pain; and when they are calmed, remove the eye and put it in your face or on your forehead to cover any joint, and be careful in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then, go into the house quickly and convert yourself to your case; and advise that no disciples should intermingle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And some came from the Yrach who told us that in some places it was made for the almagda perciet, but if one catches the fever, there is none in our land, nor do I know of any in the old books; and by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of amalgam, because those who do not know them by sight; and they are in fact:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And these are the heads of the several subtleties of this matter, and the tail is at third angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the char and the needle.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No chisels or needles are ever born or changed, and if they have any that seem like scorpions at the mouth of the pipe; and if they have a char enchanced with fuxe color, and if it is a char of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these chisels which are not enchanced, and do not have fuxe color, it is necessary that you hold the patient between your hands before the sun; and work their noses, and grease the incisions on those chisels, and take them away; for if you do not hold them firmly in the subtle spatumile of one hand, until you see that the char is all out.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If there is nothing else that can be done, and if you examine all the strumpets subtly and lightly, without causing any harm; and if you do not have any tools, or an axe, if you cut as it should be, and if the wounds are not infected, then cauterize as much as possible and let it dry out so that all the bones become hard and the wounds heal, then apply ointment or poultice.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If you can operate, and moisture comes to the palace, see that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pierce as it should, see that it has not caused any harm to the bone in the arm, or that the strumpets cannot be cut: therefore it is necessary to tie a thread around the tip of your finger, and it should be large enough for your hands, and there should be one between each nail; and put the malignant strumpet at the end of the thread in the mouth, and carry it around so that it does not stink; and often do this for the child as they go to school, and it is a light thing for him who sees it; then hold the chief that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other chief that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and let them pass one after the other without any pain.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	1. Do whatever you can to make the child believe that the dough has turned into a char, then take the boy's penis, cut the veins, and grease the penis with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in its place as before; do this 3-4 times or more until the ointment corrupts all that is left of the dough; then put a candlestick of plaster for some days as long as it is healthy, and if you have experience with drying herbs, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the child's head, or as we call it, distilling the oils and medicines or the candlestick.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a candelabrum, and guide it thus; and if you see, if it is a candle closed, and the wicks are flat to expel the wick; and it has a handle at the wick to hold it while heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the charcoal when it is cold
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times the head of the disease called "tetanus" is seen, which grows and becomes very large, until it is seen that something must be done at the beginning; then all the bones are cut off, and the hot cauterization or medicated ointment is applied; and if it is delayed as long as it is large, if it is hard, of a dark color, poor sense: if it does not touch metal at all, because it is enchanted, because when it is touched, no harm comes to the patient; and if the tetanus is of such a nature that it touches metal, not of iron, but of silver or gold, and you see that you can cover it, if you see that the patient's mouth is wide open and the hand is pale, and you can cure him of things dry and restricting.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the wound is cut and closed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	When a solution for continuation comes from one of these cartilages, it does not last long and is not found in any man.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to do this if there is no other remedy; look at whether the wound is fresh at its base; and then apply two legs of a garter, then treat it as much as it is healthy; and if the lips are already swollen on both sides, it is necessary that you scrape all parts of it as they become healthy, then assemble the two legs of a garter, extract it, and sprinkle some dragon's blood powder and incense on it; put some powder in a piece of soothing ointment container, and leave it until it dries, then treat the wound as much as it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing if you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the stomach sewing; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lesions of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	The lips of the lesions have hard, grain-like areas that become more and more severe; therefore, it is necessary to treat the lips by turning them, each time cutting off a small piece, and taking them out with tweezers and closing each part; then use the leech after incising the veins, as long as they are not swollen; and then use the leech for drying things as soon as they are healed.
de la char des gencives	Of the chastity of the genitals
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	The chastity of the genitals has been pricked many times, which is what they call the "albulus"; if you can hold it with your fingers, and the root of the penis, and leave the wound or the vein; then put on the leather glove, or other restraining and desiccant powders; and if the chastity returns after the incision, and many times, if the root is second time, and cauterized: if it does not return soon after the cauterization; and these are the forms of the stums por coper.
des sordens	of the swords
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	1. No instances are gathered at the chief of the teeth, where the mouth is between the legs; gums that are swollen and harsh; and no instances are the black and citrus tooth and its root, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and it becomes the blackened tooth; if you intend to place the tooth between your hands, and its roots are in your holy hand, and open the teeth or the gums, as long as there is nothing more; and then make black and green, and yellow and other stains, as they are manufactured; and if this is in the first reason, it is good; but if not, continue to re-open the second day and the tooth, as long as you have everything back; and examine that the teeth have different forms of discoloration according to what the demonstration shows, because the rasor that whitens the teeth has other forms than those shown in the teeth; and these forms and others are with you apparent.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	1. It is necessary when you treat the patient's tooth pain that you delay your treatment as much as possible, because it should not be done; for it is a substance of high value, therefore there is no excuse for neglecting it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	2. When the patient is forced to undergo treatment, then you must be certain of the tooth's condition.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	3. Many times the patient's pain subsides, and ensure that the tooth is sound, and treat the tooth; and it will not leave the pain for long as long as the tooth is being treated, because we have already wanted to do this for these healthier ones; and when you are certain of the tooth's condition, if you must scrape off the tooth as much as possible, then use a piece of soft sponge to protect the gums of all parts; then the mouth should be your tool or have small hooks at the first post and post, as they are well inserted, then firmly fix the hooks; and the head of the patient's tooth should be well held in your healthy hand between your fingers, and it should be held so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth firmly with the forceps, and if it does not break, then take none of these strings and pull out each piece lightly, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the teeth are seen and pulled out, then it is necessary to fill them with cloths, whether they are loose or tight; and if the extraction is done gently with needles, which does not break the tooth; and it is wise to cover the groin for cleaning the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be sure not to break it, and there will remain a part, and the patient suffers from the malice of the root, with greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	1. And you wear that you do not make it as they do who, by their haste and their hardiness, break the charm never, and they do not harm you anything that we have counted; but they bring it once by the aches of this great disease either by the roots that they desire, or by the broken bone, if often we want; and when it is raw, if you wash the leather with wine or vinegar and silk; and if they come out of the sang and water, which often comes, if you use the leather with vitriol ground; and if it is not, if you cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the wisdom teeth, or rather their points and roots, are long and wide, and do not double when you grind the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they are of large bones if they do not break when grinding, and are made of good iron, and are teeth that can be held tightly.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root of the tooth is broken, then you must put it in your mouth with wet cotton for one or two hours.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	as long as it is ground, then you will remove the tines that are called "alveoli," and they should look like a gum; and these are made in the same way as a tooth and are the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of all these pricks, then it comes that you pull out the char entirely from the root, and put the instrument called "althali", which is a type of palinche, and its shape is as follows:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be large and thick if it does not break the skin, and if the root jumps by this, it is good; if not, then use all the instruments, and their shapes come after like this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you need to use this instrument which has two rails, its shape is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front of the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems to be large thorns, its shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	1. And so it is that the force of the fracture may be broken, and the screws are made from the ends of the bones; and other screws, which are not quite as good, and the masters use their own instruments to make them, according to what their experience and the disease they demonstrate, because they have some diseases or the ancients did not teach any instrument for the diversity of the bones and their breaking point or other bones, or they perforate, if they seek screws that are necessary, which I have told you, and I will guide you with gestures, according to the form.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-holding so that they do not slip, but can hold and bear; then restore the part of medicines suitable for this, and if there is in the bone a fissure, and it is small, then use all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears to not fit with the natural body, and its form is misshapen, and even in women with many teeth, if you find that the teeth are not well after the tooth, and it is not right with the root, and it cannot be cut or carved: then remove it; and if it is attached to the tooth, if you use this instrument of which I have shown the form, and it resembles a small peg, and is of hard iron sawn into a point:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And how to handle a few teeth that are loose and wiggling, and because you don't move the others, and if it appears that one can be pulled out, then the tooth of a part of the tooth like this is formed:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is like the making of a pair of needle eyes; and in the tooth a few teeth are loose and wiggling slightly, if they do not move until they fall out; then the end is flat with no rasping, and the teeth are too sharp and they bend the tongue, if it is necessary to pull out the spicule as much as possible, if it does not bend the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth loosen by pressure or chewing, and the patient cannot press on them because of the pain they cause, and they should be treated with restraining medicines, and it does not help; if it is to be restrained with a golden thread, because the silver threads become green and rotten, but the gold does not move at all; and if the thread is too thick or too thin, according to the amount of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth, take the thread and the wire double between the two healthy teeth, then place the threads between the sick teeth, as long as you see improvement in the healthy tooth on the other side; then resume the covering where you started, and gently and wisely move your hand until it does not move at all; and if the patient's lip is at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then, the head of the child is held with nails, and they are assembled, and placed between the healthy teeth, and set in such a way that it does not cause the tongue to bleed; and then it is left there as tightly as possible, and if it loosens, or the string comes off, if it is tightened with another string; if it remains and serves for all its length, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the incisors of the healthy second teeth and the canines, just as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is removed, if it is reinserted into the gum, repeatedly, as we have said; and it does not become sore or inflamed, and never takes on the shape of a bone-like horse chestnut tooth, and it is placed in the gum where it is lacking, and if it fails, it is tightened as we have said, and remains for a long time:
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Of the copper wire of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No time is lost when the tongue is cut or cut off, which is necessary; or by accident from a wound; and the wires are such that they can open the mouth of the patient, and have their end in their mouth, and lift the tongue; then cope the nervous wire as wide as possible, until the tongue is loosened from its place, and if it bites or becomes crooked, and it is due to pain, if the tooth bites and cope widely the other side; and make sure that the wound does not become too large, for the artery is cut; and when you have done, if the gum is red and sore, or cold, then place the tongue on a linen tent; and the patient should be licked every night, so that the mouth does not become dry.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the dislocation occurs again, if the limb is quickly placed in the cold water; and if it does not heal, then the burn cauterization at the slow cautery, which is good for this, is made, and another treatment is done as soon as it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the burn is not red or black and hard, if the patient does not feel it, if it is not touched, because it is a gangrene; and if it is declining into the bladder, and it has moisture, if it oozes pus, and the doctor makes a subtle spumous application, and delivers from one part and another; and if it does not heal in your care, then place the limb in cold water as much as possible, until all the swelling is gone. Then lift the limb from the castle and the other treatments as soon as it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	gums of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Never comes the gums of the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "abscesses". When you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not healthy, keep them: if they are hard, of small size, and white color, if they are not touched by iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, if not touched by iron, then for the evacuation of blood; but let it be until it is dead, and then you will leave it, or it will break on its own; and if it is of blainche color and the root is subtle, if you have prepared the instrument with copper, but first look at whether the gums are chalz rested and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	1. Therefore, place the patient in front of the sun, and make sure their head is in your hand, and they open their mouth and take the thread and pass it between their fingers, and press the tongue gently all over the instrument, as if it were silver or gold: and it can be made from fine silver or gold, like some threads.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	2. Can you press the tongue all over this instrument, and see the abscess, if you take the knife and the needle in the ginger, and draw it to the end where you please; and take no thing from the threads with, then close the instrument, as if it were made of silver or gold, that seems like strong forces; and all the limbs are twisted, and one place is another, and they are very tight, and is made of iron inde or of gall:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, if you have needles, then this is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	Then cut from one end and the other; and when you have cut one of the strings, cut the other in the same manner, and after making the incision, wet the blade with hot water, and make it sharp and smooth, and let the sutures come out if they are hot, or if scabs from pomegranate seeds are cooked, or if they are fueled with mirte, and such things; until the mouth is not swollen. Then cure it as it becomes healthy; and never have any other abscesses born in the mouth than the two strings, if they are cut off like the two strings.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with a small wound that affected her throat, it is to say an abscess; and she had almost completely closed all the gullet, so that the woman could not breathe through the clogged duct, and could not drink or eat, and died if she delayed for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had been drained twice through the two holes.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I removed it completely, and found in one hole a large piece of bone, and in the other hole a considerable portion of bowel; then I took another piece from the other abscess, and pushed the mouth and pressed the tongue; after removing the bone from this abscess and part of it, only a little blood came out; and then the woman was able to swallow water and wine, and continued to cut away the abscess as long as it did not close; and the abscess grew back, filling the wound I had made, so that it became very large; therefore I cauterized and burned the gullet: afterwards she recovered and I left these parts, and only God will do for me after this.
de l’uve	Of the uterus
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the uterus is drawn towards the vagina, and it is long and thin, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is very large and curved, it is called "uterus".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have described in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the abscess is quieted and subtle, and it is suitable to copulate; and the one that is curved is assembled and not long; and it is bloody or has a red or black color, and it is suitable to cut into the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore, as you see, according to the method I have described, that you should cut the skin and flesh, that you place the patient before the sun, and press the lip on the instrument we made note of earlier; then remove the gallbladder through the urethra, and cut it into two segments, and sew them together with two stitches as I mentioned in the incision of the two eyes.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut too much, only the excess above the natural termination; for if you cut more, it will hurt your voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two eyes, and cure as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has pain in the other shoulder, then you must use an engine for the cauterization of the other shoulder.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cauterizing is to make it smoking hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the patient puts his head on your hand and then presses his tongue on the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and confuses it with hot iron, if it is not too thick or too clear, and uses the edge of this instrument, then the form is:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has a hair on his head or puts medicine in his mouth, as if it were a pinch of salt, and places the instrument in all the medicine behind the eye; and the patient is giddy on his chest, if the saliva and mucous from his mouth come out of the medicine, if it does not reach the throat and neck, then hold your hand over all the medicine and press on the eye, as much as you can see and the medicine's sting is calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and pull the instrument out of the cotton through the loop of the cord, as much as the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and after four or five hours or days, if you have the skill to re-cauterize the medicine, if it resumes, and after the cauterization of the discharge through the eye, wrap it in wool, and clean what is inside the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and cure gargles as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision alone. If it is treated with fumigation in this way, take calamus, ginger, origanum, rosemary, chamomile, and all sorts of herbs, and mix them together in one pot, and add water, and boil; and the mixture will be well glued to the earth, and the pot should have the instrument made this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or gold, and one of the heads should be inserted into the patient's mouth as long as the vapor rises up the urethra through the penis, until the urethra is blocked; after that, it often resumes, until the urethra dries, and make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of priapism, as more things can happen; and do not do this unless it is during the decline of priapism.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a knife and cut the head of the catheter, if the mouth of the patient has not been too tight; for the catheter's head does not cause the vapor to scrape the mouth, and it is good for the patient's assembly salute.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened in the throat or spine of fish, or nothing at all; therefore, if you must see what is there, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and if you do not open it and it is stuck in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit otherwise than if the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if you manage to do this through vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of gum, or a root of herbage, or a morsel of dry bread; and then wrap it around the sponge and then squeeze it; and when it comes to the mouth, if it sticks, and then pull it out; and if it does not come out of what we have said, then take the instrument of plucking according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	1. And let the sutures be placed at the head if it can more gently enter the mouth, and have the head raised; and guard that you do not touch the epigastrium, that all may live, and no bone be crushed; and it is best that the surgeon or assistant holds the instrument, because it is most likely to be held correctly; if it is let go, or it is drawn further along the instrument evenly, as far as it can be.
de la sansue de la gorge	2. of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	3. No time is needed for medicine, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when it does not benefit, look at the mouth of the patient to the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the limb, if the bone is all fine and small, or if there are subtle needles that are worth this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this is not enough, then take a fine hair, and pull it out of the patient's throat, then pull or cut off the hair, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And make the patient drink this every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full mouthful of cold water, and open the mouth, and feel the saliva come out, and move it to your hand often; and if the limb feels cold immediately, then cool it.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if she does not understand as we have said, if the patient is smoking tobacco, with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, as it feels good.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of the fumigation if you prefer to have it or if there are charcoals visible, and it is placed inside a covering of a cloth in the environment, and in that case, the instrument's head; then you perform your fumigation, and the patient places the end of the cinnamon stick in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not enter, but goes to the throat; and the throat hurts now, and if it continues, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient drink plenty of water and salty foods and no lemonade; and then continue with this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument used when treating wounds, if it is, when one can see, resembles needles with sharp points to enter the mouth; it resembles the beak of a surgeon, and has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and thus, the form is:
li chapistres des apostemes	The cautery of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The appearances of the abscesses are, according to what is remembered in this book, and are diverse in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is in its own appearance, and that it is moist.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method if by the hands or if they are at the course.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the apostes of his head are different from those of his foundation, and the apostes of his limbs are different from those that come in jointures, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if an aposte is not perceived, as long as the bow is dead according to its completion; and if there are such cases where it is necessary to perceive when they are thought to be, and they do not die according to their completion, like those of jointures.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when apostes come from jointures, and they are left as long as they are porris entor, by chance if the ligament and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is caused by contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	1. If the incision is deep into the limb, and you delay the perforation as long as possible, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is the foundation, if you do not stop it when it is almost dead, it will cause the foundation to collapse, and the fistula will be long and narrow, and it will not heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	2. And it is necessary that you clean the wound of the incision that is dead according to the completion, and when the pain is eased, when the fever subsides, when the pain and the bleeding are lessened, and when the debility and the fatigue are lessened, and other signs; and it is necessary that you close the wound or more dependent on the incision, and where it was opened; and it should be a long wound, and if the incision is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all of them equally or not.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those places where they prick, according to the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is present in the body, if it is necessary to leave the puncture as long as it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you prick in this way before it, if the corse of the blood comes out from it, and it is painful to the mouth; and by chance they harden the lips and make them flat from it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no abscess that is pricked according to the large vein, according to the member that it can endure.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	1. It is necessary that you carefully cut the small abscesses, small pustules; and in large abscesses, large pustules, and many flays according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or they have to be cut away, and closed; when they become as hard as I am, and are dry, it is necessary to do so in the same way as one does with bubbles: and if there are such ones that are flayed at three angles, and if there are such ones that are flayed like the thorn of a rose, like abscesses of the gallbladder; and if there are such ones that are cut into a smaller size, and others in different sizes and appearances closed.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	1. If those who lack a caput, if it is only a superficial abscess, then you must open it gradually; and when the abscess is large, and the pus is thick, and it has entered the bone, then you must open it, unless you pour all the pus out in that hour, but pour a part; then the abscess stops, and the next day it opens again, and you do not pour anything else, as long as the bone is completely empty; at the same time, if the patient is weak in virtue, or if women carry, or if small children, or old men with decayed bones.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expectors have never seen the end of the bowel, by chance died the patient, and you will not believe it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you feel the abscess, if the wound is small, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a small abscess, and it has many purulent secretions, then make tents of linen or cotton thread; and if it is large abscesses, and they have a lot of pus, then tie each one with a tent so that one against the other; and if you have found in the abscess a part of leather, and you have shaved it out, then fill it with fine cloth or rag of linen sense moisture, and the stitch, and the cure of ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the wound becomes infected in your shoulder, if you get sudden cold and wet, and many pain, and make the limb bend, and put it on the wound many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound persists, if it is not governed and cured, and the powders I mentioned in my hands in this book, and if you have fever, and the wound is nervous, then you should put on bandages and bend them with soft wine and ointment; and if it is like this, and the wound is hard, then you should put on bandages bent with cold and ointment, or with wine and oil hot, as we have said; and then take away the aposteme and the discharge and the cure, as it comes, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it comes to pass that you understand completely in the treatment of abscesses: or you have said how one must go before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of sore
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When severe abscesses come, and they are like us in their appearance, as the grape of a vine, and have similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	It has the appearance of being fat and large, or moist like a pig; and if it is of such a nature that it is hard and rough to the touch, and there is no doubt that the artery will not be harmed by it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the sections of size that you touch with all the instruments called "entromising," depending on the form that comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then it is made longer by means of suspensions.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is seen, it is scraped off without leaving any hair that contains this moisture, because it returns as soon as it is left alone; then put cotton on the wet bandage, if it is present; if not, use aloe and linen, and apply the wound, and leave it until the other day; and whatever is left over will be what is needed.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then the process resumes as before, on the second day, and the wound, as long as you see that it does not become worse overnight; then treat the wound with ointment according to what is suitable, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the gangrene holds the joint fat, and it follows this form, and your bones are eaten away, and all parts of the skin are burned, and you apply all your care to draw out the poison from the wound or the artery, and if the artery turns against you, then do as I have said after this.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And if the gangrene is very severe, and it is cut off and treated as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And it measures the incision scar and the wound, if it is smaller, because there are few sutures.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there is no moisture in any of these incisions or wounds, and these were not made by an old woman; and I found the scar as a rough, sharp, bleeding piercing, which could not be cut; and if none was made, it would have been as good as a piercing.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other incisions or wounds, the opening should be as large as possible at the most dependent part of the limb, to relieve the knee; and the cure should be done as needed.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times, the abscess comes to the neck, and loosen the girdles, and the wounds, and never have any other part or course, and they are mortified, and are intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly directed to its side, as if it were the abscess and the neck of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofula are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	It has several that contain moisture, and there are some that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that which you see of good disposition at the wound, and is similar to the color of the healthy flesh, and is not thin in any part, and is not rough as the neck of the head or the artery or the vein, and is not too deep; if it comes that you cut it with a knife, and burn it in some parts, and are the lips of the teeth as the gums, if you have mastery of it, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and the scar is small and few, and you are sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and are not too deep, that the hands do not slip, and do not see too far ahead, that you do not cut more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	1. If you prick the vein or artery, and it does not bleed, then put vitrol grits or any other powder that adheres to blood in the wound, and stretch the wound; and leave it until the inflammation is calmed and soothes the wound, and begins to ooze.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	1. If the wound is not cleansed, and it returns to its place, as soon as you complete it; then wait for your doctor's sign if it does not show any small pimples, such as scars and wrinkles.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	1. If the wound is a large pimple, then only clean it if you can reach the pimple at its root, but tie a strong double thread around it, and leave it alone without causing any harm; then apply an ointment of Egyptian linen to the wound, and cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you cover the entire wound, and manage to bring together the two lips of the cut, and hold them now, then there will be no excess due to the size of the wound.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you understand how to cover the root of it, and to treat it further, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those wounds that have superfluity, either perforate or become dead; and the perforation is done as in the one mentioned earlier, depending on it, and then the dressings are applied with ointment and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what has been cut off; and when the wound is healed, if the cure of the ointment is charged with sanez, it is well.
de squinance	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	The first sentence to translate is "Aces qui ont squinance, il covinet que li fendure de la gorge qui est appelee «epiglote» soit eschue; et c'on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the narrow passage, it is necessary to cover the epigastium to escape the destruction that comes from dislocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epigastium, that we cut it at about three or four circles or one small cut through the cartilage; and then if it is possible to section the epigastium without damaging the liver, and the wounds are long enough, then.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the masters are not able, then it comes that the jawbone extends to the entire head, then cut the skin as far as the ear goes to the chin; and avoid the veins of the face, if you see nothing, and then cut the flesh, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the flesh that is broken off from the bone that is torn due to the fracture, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hour has passed since the injury, gather the two lips of the wound as much as possible, and touch all sides of the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote healing, as soon as it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim does not do this until the patient is completely unconscious, and the physician is judged dead, and the lack of hair.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, they cut the epigastrium because the physician cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and it is kept from death; and for this they commanded the physician to leave the wound open until the malady of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And therefore they commanded to sew the wound and cure it as soon as it was cured; and I will tell you what I see.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see that a maiden is being cut, and she has a piece of cloth in her throat, and part of her clothing is torn; and I was called to cure her, and I found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discover the wound, and find the blood that came from it, and though she did not have much strength or blood loss, the wound was in the throat, and it was through this wound that she died.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and treated the wound, and cured her as soon as she was healed; and she did not die until she was hoarse of voice, and returned after her disposition; therefore I say that in the tailoring of the epigastrium there is no great pain.
de la grosse gorge	Of the large jaw
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Hernia of the jaw is called an "epigastric hernia," and it consists of large hernias in a red color, and is often found in women; it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental; if natural, there is no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident occurs in two ways: one is similar to fatty tissue, and the other is similar to hernias that come from the arteries; if there is pain, and it is not necessary to overdo it, it is better to use a small one, and prove and search for all the introitus: if you believe it is as fat as I am, and cannot be found in any way, if it is crooked, if it is like the ones we cut, and take all its contents, if there are none; and close it well, and cure it as much as possible.
des nous	1. "Of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	2. "There are many ways of us, all of which I will mention; and it is necessary to know the difference between a newborn and an outbirth.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	3. "I say that an outbirth is choler and fever, as long as the jaundice has passed and is completed with the digestion; therefore, the fever and choler rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	4. "With the newborn there is no choler or fever or pain, and it contains sweat, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the heart, and becomes a rash; and they are according to two appearances, either green or moist, and the color is so as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of a newborn, that you first examine and search with all the instruments called "dislocater" according to what its form comes or chapter which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	The manner of examining the abscesses of the body is that you press or more moistly the part where the abscess is, and turn your two hands and hands as many times as you can until you feel that the stitch has caught the keur, then that is according to the size of the abscess; then take out the dislocater, and hold it in such a way that the thrust will be.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	1. If moisture occurs during the cut, it will depend on its color, just as with other abscesses; and if no swelling follows the incision, it is considered fat, so it is incised in a cross shape, and the edges are sewn together with needles, and the wound is lightly scorched from each side and covered with the dressing you use to cleanse it; and if you do not cleanse it properly, it is done in pieces so that nothing comes out.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	1. If nothing comes out, it returns to you many times; and if it costs a lot, and you do not grieve, use some corrosive powders on the wound, stretch the wound, and put soothing remedies for the abscess on it, and cure other wounds as long as it is healthy; and if it is large, if you cut the lips of the wound, and cure the one who caused the injury.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	When the vein is difficult to pierce or if it moves, and you hurry and use the glass leu, and leave it for 2-3 hours until the wound stops bleeding and the pain subsides, then return to the copper that it needs to be done.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the entangled stones, and there are three kinds: large and flat and small; and they are called "albaret" in three varieties, and "breb" is one, and they are also in three varieties: large, flat, and small, to encircle the fistula apertures; they are also like the beaks of birds, and are made of gold, silver, or copper, and those that are yellow are more valuable than those that are black, to encircle the corbeurs of fistula; they are in three varieties: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the largesce of the abscesses.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the nails are like mirrors, as you see: large, medium, and small; and if the nails have II beak types in III ways, such as; and if the nails have III beak types and are in III ways, and if the nails have II beak types and are not in III ways, and are in I way, and all these are necessary for their leu.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these are sharp, and such as cannot cut anything finer than one part, which burns the nose, because it does not touch the vein or nerve; and these introducers are returned to the fingers, so that the surgeon does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are never used except in the leu charnut, like legs, arms, hands, and fingers, and toes, and in resemblance of these instruments, as if they were scrapers of rasps, according to this form, and never made smaller than rasps, according to this form, and never lost at the opening of the abscesses.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And he sets it on none of the bones that are strong against wounds and arteries, and never returns to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Ne ever inflame the breasts of others when they come to be corrupted, as if they were breasts of women; and become lank and swollen, and those who see them cure them, if they come to be like this form in this line .b. until .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scarify the fat, and apply medicinal fire to the wound, then sew the lips of the wound together as tightly as possible, and cure it as long as it is healthy; and if the breasts become swollen and inflamed as if they were women's breasts, and they are sewn together in the corners of the corners, if one of them holds onto the other at the end of each and the other, then that the smaller line contains the larger according to this form, from this line .b. until .g.; then scarify the skin that is between the lips, and remove the fat, and do what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not all made, because the patient does not rest, or because of the decorrement of pain, if you fill the wound with cotton moistened with corrosive ointment; and leave it until it drains the remaining fat and grease, then cure it as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au mala
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The translation of the first sentence is: "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	1. Those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, along the line .b. and .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And when the whole bow is in the abscess, if you use the cotton plaster, leave it until the next day, then take out all the cotton and treat with ointment as needed until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	3. And if the abscess resembles scabs, then it is like we said in our words of scabs, and if the wound has many boils, then it should be cauterized as we said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is torn, and the wound is deep where it was made, if there are many abscesses, and also the vein becomes inflamed and abscessed; and if you see that this is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and thin; and when you feel it in your hands, if it feels tight; and when you see that it is from the vein, then it is best to cut it short; and it is madness to treat this abscess, and at the same time when the stitches are loosened and the wounds are open and out of place for others, and the wounds are large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The translation of the first line is: "Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the use of fire, and the one who is in charge must also avoid it, and in the one who is made to bend the artery that has been cut from a long piece of skin; then cut the size as onions, and remove the artery from the toes as far as it is discovered; then take an awl and perforate the other side, and draw the artery into a double thread according to what I have shown in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then point the bone that is between the two links of an introducer as much as it does not move, and set the graft; then apply the cure that follows the bow, as long as the ligatures are tight; then cure this as soon as it is healthy; and if the graft is for the vein, then when it is necessary to tie it with your hand what you have of the graft all over the skin, then take the awl from your hand and perforate the bone that you hold in your hand, and pull out the thread, and if it is double, then pull it on the other side; then tie the graft as I have said, or one of the two parts of the two films; and if you doubt that the filaments do not come out, then take another awl for all the filaments of the first awl, and draw them in four places; then close the graft as much as the excess comes out, then close the excess on the knee and leave what is tied; then put a loose bandage on the wound with wine and oil, then apply cures of plasters and poultices as soon as it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	For the fire cautery, when abscesses come into the artery and vein, they come as abscesses in the nerves when they are too tight or due to too much work, and similar things occur.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	1. And this happens more often with helpers and you must do it on all joints, and that is the first aid, and its color seems like the color of a corset, and it is in many positions with pain; and when it is pulled out, it feels like the patient's pain, and not as much as in the chest, but rather like the loins; and it is very still in all parts, and does not move forward or backward, nor does it come out, and the one who is in the joints cannot get it with force: by chance, it causes contraction; and he who is at the shoulder or forehead, makes the skin sweat.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the amputation is small, and it is held by nails, and the bone is in its root; and if it is large, and the bone spreads to the hip, and burns, then the hip and assembles the wound at the seam, and the cure is done as soon as it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	large tongues hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never occurs in the belly and does not affect any other part of the body, and is a disease called "funge" by its appearance, and is located at the subtle root, and the head is large; and it has small and great pits; and I saw one who had them, his belly which was more like funges than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had thin roots, and were worn, and became rotten with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I found them and discovered in one there were eighteen heavy ounces, and in the other six. The incisions are made if you observe that the wounds are moist, and the color of the artel is bluish-green and moist with a subtle root; if the copper is large and spatula-shaped, and they are present when the fire cautery is performed.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For the cautery, there are often too large dislocations of the wound, and if it is not treated, then you must cauterize; and if you see the wound oozing and blistering from the incision, then take a piece of clean cloth well made, and insert it into the artel as we have said, and leave it there; and then tie it, and do not stop pulling on the cloth until the artel is coped, and work with it; and if the roots are large, then pierce the abdomen but not too much, then cauterize so that it does not re-open; then treat the wound, and keep the hole that is full of feces, poor sense, and milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are enchanted gums, and I will come to the cure of this sore afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the gum becomes inflamed, then
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the inflammation appears, it comes from cauterization of the wound or flaying of the face, and is situated in the abdomen and sometimes in some of the bowels, as in other cases, or of the veins or arteries according to what is before; and if it is due to the rupture of the gum and the issue of the blood, then the color of the gum resembles the color of the corpse, and is a light thing with pain, and has multiple exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed at both ends, and then returns, and by chance if it slips, and enlarges the mouth of the anal opening and requires great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand; it does not constrain you. And if it is due to sac, if it is large and hard, and is felt according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to vasospasm, if it is cold at the touch, and the appearance is that of the spasm of the artery, vein, or vasospasm.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it comes to your attention that you must leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of cauteries, for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If it appears that the wound is in the intestine or the bowels, then command the surgeon to touch the hair with his finger, and extend it all directions, then squeeze tightly around it; then command him to sew it with thread between his hands, then enter the wound that you have made on the entire thigh, then make half of the suture at the end of the aposteme on the great sciatic nerve; then tie firmly with a strong cord or rope, or with a fine silk ribbon securely, and make sure the half of the suture is on the ribbon, and touch the intestine; if you catch it with the ribbon, and if it slips, and touch the intestine at the lower belly; if you catch the bowels, and if they are caught in the groin, and cut off the superfluity; and if the artery or vein is against, or the wound, then return to your work and take two needles, and two threads of the same length, and sew two stitches at the place where you think you will see; then draw out the suture in four threads along the needles, and if you see, touch the thread, and leave the wound as it is until it bleeds, and take care of the patient as we have said; or if it drags gently and bleeds, then cure what is necessary, and cut off the suture as we have said; and draw out the sanc or the moister that you took, then cure the wound for the patient as we have said, and soothe the wound with which you were touched.
dou chancre	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of the appearances of a chancre, and it is noted that one must overcome by medicines, and it is noted that iron must be used for the cure; and we say that the chancre enjoys in the marsals, and great caution in the cure, and they tell the ancient that when chancres are in the loins or can be treated if like the chancre which is in the mammary glands, and in the knees, and in the limbs, and it must be all done when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, if only you approach it, because I have never seen anyone cured; and no one has ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And the cutting, when it is in the flesh or can be opened, is that you never purge the cauterant with black lead; then make it healthier if there is manifest fullness, then open the vein with a knife to make the cut; then your bones will become soft or decayed, and all the hair will fall out, and all the nails will become loose; and leave the wound as it is, and press well on the place with your hand or with nothing, and if they dislocate from the wound, it is because the cauterant has been applied too much to the artery or vein, so that the flesh is not anesthetized; then another treatment is needed as soon as it is healthy.
de ydropisie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’ils soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And so proceed with the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And so proceed with the second part. At the point, and if you do not see it enter only as far as the intestine when you touch it, and it cannot be cut; then look if the hydrometer is in contact with the intestines: if it comes that you cut from the abdomen, the third must be done straight above the point of puncture; and if it is due to liver disease, then the cut must be made at the third from the right; and if it is due to mucus, then it must be made at the left, and not more than the bile ducts do not flow to the weakest part of the liver; then perforate all the skin with the instrument, and the bougie, and ease your hand over all the squamous tissue between the skin and the fistula as you would when scraping a piece of wax or as much as it comes out to the left four, and that is the end of the abscess, then pull out the instrument, and if the bougie is of the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a silver needle, and is of iron or light wood, and in its part nearest to the little puncture; and on one side, three punctures; and on another side, two, and one; and it is the head cut so as to be like a quill, and is the shape of the incision that the scribes make with the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the head of it is the axe, so that when it is struck by the edge, if it bends now under the instrument; empty the part which is the first or third, for if you see more than it should be in that hour, by chance it may die from the resolution of its spirit of the arm, or it may have cold hands, or it may be near death; but according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of his virtue signify, and his courage; then take away the instrument and hold the edge, and it is held now by the heat which dries the puncture which was sawn by the sycamore, according to what I have spoken, that you perceive this way; then resume the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take a small quantity of astringent; do this every day, and keep it from being too long, until it does not more but has a little astringent.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you doubt the patient's condition and do not provide relief, then the cure for the grave or sandwound is to let the patient drink water or bath and in the sun, and the sign of thirst; and the cure of drying medicines as soon as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the wound, just as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the tooth
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never have children been born who did not have a toothache in the gum, or if it is small, or it is not present in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the patient is not able to perceive anything at all, even the slightest subtle thing according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the catheter subtlely and tie it with the thread, and leave it for 3 or 4 hours, and when you see that urine is coming out, if it does not close, then remove the catheter; and by chance, no one will be closed, because the urine that comes out will not close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the catheter is small, and it is treated with a tight clot of thread as we have said, then if it enlarges.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the catheter in their groin are bleak, because no one has the catheter at the tip of the penis, since they cannot urinate before they lift their penis up; and they cannot ejaculate because of this, because the matter does not come out quickly enough, and it is a very serious disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And the manner of the cauterization is that when the patient suffers from soreness on his back, it is the head of the thorn and the point is like the size of a pen's tip, if it pierces through the skin, if possible; and keep away from the loss of blood that comes often, and if it happens, if the wound is cleaned and cured as soon as it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	1. of thorn's pustules
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Many times they come out in the thorn, and it has a disgusting appearance; and among them are malignant and non-malignant ones; if you burn them at the subcutaneous fat, and cut and clean them all, then put on cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; then the treatment of ointment diaconicon as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the tumor is malignant, of a putrid smell and size, then it comes that you must use cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	After you have cauterized it, and if the tumor is still in its early stage, and has part of its skin and hair, then it comes that you must cut off the part that was skin; and when it has healed, if the hair grows back.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you cut it off in one piece, if you do not secure the head of the tumor, and it is not perceived, then blackness and corruption come to the part that was cut off; then everything that is black and corrupt comes out, then apply the plaster of honey and flour made from the scraps of roasted peaches and vinegar, then other treatments as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if the evacuation of blood comes, then follow this form of the lunar cauterization:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if the evacuation of blood comes, then follow this form of the lunar cauterization: It is knowledge, at the discharge of blood, and at corruption; and if the head of the thorn is corrupted and retracts, if it happens that you bind or lead the thorn with a cord, and pierce the malaide through; and when the pelts are drawn to the root of the thorn which has come to these who have not been circumcised, or have been injured or infected, then it comes to pass that you scrape it with the instrument's blade, as long as the lips are slipped, and are released from the thorn's root through all parts; and if this is a difficult matter to do, then you scrape it in the spittle of any part of the thorn and the hair; then apply some element between them, and put a subtle drapery of wet lin on the cold needle, so that it does not pierce again.
de la circoncision	Of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the least of wounds if it follows others; however, when we perform this work out of our own will and for the benefit of our children, and properly as it should be for them, and the most gentle for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not call circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have the greatest part of masters and physicians who performed circumcisions outside the del, with force, and on all occasions; if it were not for the knife, which has many edges, and by chance if one cuts more than he intended, and moreover if one cuts too much.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	When the wound is cleaned, and there is double pain, and the circumcision that is not properly secured is not sure of the point of the member; and the circumcision of the finger by chance escapes the iron, and cuts the skin, and often does not grow out, and many times are born without any need of circumcision, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the circumcision that is made with force, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut both ways, as well as above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, if it fits well in I, but that the thread is not too thin; and that the manner of the first cut is such that it seems to you that the child understands, that you do not pull the thread too much, only when the verge, and then pull it straight between your hands or your fingers that the children do not see, nor any of the strings; then put your hand on the verge and blow or keep it, and lift it as high as the head of the verge is assembled, then make a good mundification of the waste that is assembled, then tie the leu signiet of a double thread, then tie the other lien to the other lien; and tie the knot between the two pouches and the dot, then loosen the grip very quickly and lift the head of the verge; then leave the sanc poc and poc, for it is the most evil; and put some powder on and powder the powder with a piece of cooked beef cut in small pieces, confited with olive oil and fresh, and leave it suspended over the other jar, and the cure is done as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the body's end is this: the two heads are thin and long, and are as strong as the fingers equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mummification is when the hair escapes at the incision; therefore, it is necessary to extend it to your nail, and if it does not cause an abscess, then the covering is well done, and if you do not hold it with your nail, then the covering will come off.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it passes three years, and the fringe is shrunk, if you allow it to be as the abscess is calmed, and gently burned, and if the covering is as you hold it from the part of the fringe, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first line of the translation is: "Cure the joint with something that has been treated with powder, as we have said or mentioned about powders, and if it is not too much measure, it will go away, if it does not hurt; cure the joint, as we have said, as soon as it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	The second line of the translation is: "Hold back the urine.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The third line of the translation is: "If the urine is bloody, or frozen, or bowel, or gallstone, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is discharged, and you see that it is retained by the urethra, which is at the anus or collar of the bladder, then it should be held with the urethra against the back, and the belly is extended from the part below the back, and restrains the urethra as much as possible; and then the urethra of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the urethra at the desire of the urine, if it is discharged, and if it does not come, if we have said, and the urethra feels great pain, then it should be administered an extraction with all the instrument called 'siringue', of which the form is: and it should be fine silver hair, as thin as the tail of a squirrel; and it should be the tail of a palm tree about half a foot long, and it should be fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Here comes the translation:
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are scorchings or abscesses in the bladder, or when purulent matter is assembled, and you see water and medicines being distilled, then do this to all the instrument called "clepsidra", and it is shaped like:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it is third degree: two parts of one, and one part of the other, as you see; and it is read by the medicine that is such that it burns well the verge without addition, if you can draw the moisture, and bind when the job is done; and when you see your medicines gushing in the bladder, put the end of the cord in the moisture, and draw it to the drawing which is therein; if you draw the moisture from the stringer, and then hardly pull the drawing therein; if the moisture enters, and comes to the bladder now, if that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle clyster in which the bladder is clisterized: if that is so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	1. It is made of silver or archaeal, and the head is higher; 2. Take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see clysterizing it, then place it between the two sides to form a double-layered pouch, and heat the moisture on the fire; 3. Then cut off the clister at the end, and hold your hand steady on the bladder until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; 4. If you don't have the bladder, take a piece of linen, make a circle, and pierce it roundly through the holes; 5. Then pull out the strong wire tightly in these holes, and assemble the circle as you would an anvil, and put what you see oil and moisture and sage in it, and tie it with the instrument; 6. And do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Of the incision
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division of the ways of incision, and the extraction of arrows, that we will mention the difference between the incision as rains, and those signs, and in which piere one must cover with size; and in the vessel, and the vertex; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the incision which is more common in the vessel is in children, and it is a sign that the water from the vessel jumps with a suddenness similar to its subtlety; and it opens wide, and grates the vertex, and it can many times, and then becomes hard; and then the inflammation of the children's forehead; and it is lighter the cure of the children up to four years, and it is grief in the village, and it is as joints pain, in those who are between joints and joints; and it is the cure more light for those who have large incisions, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	When we come to the care, if we cover the patient with a cloth first, then clean all the feces that is inside.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never closes the wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the legs, and stand up and move down until the wound comes down to the bottom of the bladder, and it does not come out once from the top; then put him between your hands, and his hands are on the bladder, if the bladder is completely deflated; then cut and touch the wound; if you feel the wound in the area, then now cut along the wound.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if she does not feel any pain at all, if your index finger indicates olive oil from the left hand, and the patient is male, or your index finger is moist, and the patient has semen; then the wound in its foundation, and want to prick it, and when you feel with your finger, if the point is at the top of the vagina; then press with your finger, and the wound will bleed where you see it should be cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the vagina with his hand, and he commands him to extend his left hand's fingers up, and his right hand to grasp the hair that is loose at the part where the cut is made; then he pierces the spatula coping, because this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	When the joint is between the collarbone and the shoulder blade, it should not be in the costal arch; and there should be two on either side of the nail; and the head should be either at the point or at the base, and the tail should be wide enough so that it does not tear, according to the size of the piercing, not too large; by chance, if the pressure is at the base, it may jump and cause discomfort; and check if there is any part with a piece of bone or an angle, and margins: if they are sharp to come out; and if a part is connected, it resembles a claw, and bends, from which the end is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	1. If the wound has angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not slip, then you must pull on the nails that are like a limestone in the head, to tighten the hole so it does not slip; or you may use a fine instrument hidden in the head; and if you do not engage it in the head, then enlarge the pore, and if it is not dry, then use vitriol to tighten it; and if there are more than one hole, then first tighten the largest one at the top of the vagina, then close it, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards, if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is left large, it will become bigger, causing a greater wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For there are two things that happen to the patient: either they die, or urine comes out through a place where the patient cannot relieve themselves; but you should try your best to draw it out, or cut it off with nails, as you draw it in pieces; and when you have completed your work, use the incision of frankincense and aloe and the sap of the dragon's blood, and extract it, and put on it ointment and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the wound; then sew up the patient at the neck, and do not leave any loose thread.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if the joint is well lubricated with oil and wax, then apply the ointment of drying and base ointment, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess comes in the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the vein, and is retained in the urine, which is done in a part of this way that without urinating with the urine: cut through the wound, and remove the clot, for if it remains, it will penetrate the vein, and cause pain; then cleanse the wound with oil and warm water, and all other ways you know, until it is healthy; and make sure that all the remedies you give, you tie the thighs, and assemble the medicines under the legs.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the prick is small and it is directed towards the groin, and it is not removed by the finger, and urine cannot be discharged; if the treatment I have prescribed is not followed several times, it is an excuse for the size of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already told you this.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	I will prepare it according to this form and make it at a 30-degree angle in one piece.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and wind it around the groin around the prick, so it does not get caught in the bladder; then pull the thread through the groin gently, as it reaches the prick; and turn the thread in your hand around the prick several times until you can feel the prick on the other side; if urine comes out, press your hand on the part of the prick that is inside the groin.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bone is entirely broken and comes out with urine, and the flesh of the patient; and if you do not know how to do this for anything else, then cut off the end of the bone and the other part, then make a groove between the two limbs, then it will come out, and remove the skin, and cleanse the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat it as soon as it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the bone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	If the bone is broken in women, and there is no other time, then it is the care of the patient that is defended by three things: one is that by chance the woman is virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well skilled who has been torn as in childbirth, even when she is in labor.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	1. If the third way is that by chance one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the woman's wound is more than the man's, because she covers it with a more perfect size, and greater pain. And if necessity requires it, then you should choose a woman well knowing, and at once take her hand, and if you do not find one, then choose a subtle one; and this presents a wise lesson in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she does what you command in the investigation of the wound; and look well if the woman is virgin: therefore it is necessary for her to submit her duty or foundation and seek the wound; and if she is pregnant, then she constrains her duty, and recommends that she submits her duty or with the midwife, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If the child does not move, it moves slightly from one end of the vagina to the other until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cover the wound at the root of the thigh with a damp cloth, and if it is not bleeding much, it will hurt there; and do not move the child's leg above or below the wound, and make sure the size is the smallest possible; then bind the wound in that size, if you feel the pain as sharp as the wound when the wound can still bleed, and sew several stitches: it is to know, small and large, sharp and blunt, long and broken, and those that have rough edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you question the appearances to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it is not without pain, if you put vinegar on the wound and hold it for an hour until it is no longer burning, then return to your work, as long as the hole is healed, and take the bandages I told you in the extraction of the hole to help you in your work; and if it is not without pain, and it is an artery that is stopped, if you put powder on the wound and wrap it with cloths and bandages, and do not continue this again, and leave the hole and do not touch it, by chance the patient may die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the pain of the wound is appeased, and it is read, if you return to your work, as long as the piercing is firm.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia of the intestine
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Hernia of the bladder is nothing more than an assembly of moisture or white sacks, which are not properly contained in the bladder; and they are called "sack" and have never been properly in the bladder, if one cares that it is another bladder; and this is the skin between the white sacks that we have said; and there have never been any.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia is due to inflammation that comes from the intestines, and it is expanded by that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	1. And never once does it come from striking the bones, and this moisture is of various colors: either it is declining to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or clear white, and this becomes more; and these are the signs of this assembly, because if it is white as we said, then the abscess pops out, looking like a ball, and it does not open the pores, because it is moist throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	2. And if it has moisture within its own cloth, then the abscess pops out with part of the pus, and because of this, it is thought to be other ointments; and if the moisture is between the skin of the bones and the white jaundice, then it feels well; therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, you should try everything that enters the introduction.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to which comes after the introducer, judge what is dense.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, if the surgeon judges that it is dense, cut it according to what can be. Then, if the patient's body is healthy and not overfilled with blood; then, he lifts his back, with one hand high, and takes some cloth from it; then, if it is on the left side, he commands the minister to sit on the right, and extend the finger between the two fifth ribs of the chest; then, he takes the scalpel, and cuts the skin of the chest along the entire length of the finger until it is white, and scars it subtly so as not to hurt; then, he pierces the white skin of the large abscess with a needle, and removes all the pus, and then puts his fingers in, and sets the wound on the costal cartilage, and does not touch the chest bone, but only the scar, and if the wound reopens, he can subtly scar it again; and if the patient's foot slips away from the work, he should quickly sew it back on, and then assemble the two costal cartilages with a stitch, and treat the wound as other wounds, as long as it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you suspect the male organ is suffering from another disease, if you doubt that it is being held back by the suspensory ligaments, then cut the ligaments all around, and remove the testicle, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the wound is assembled into two parts, as the branches; if you cut off the other part in the same manner as the first incision, then sew up the sutures with thread; then put a soft linen cloth soaked in rose oil on the wound; and put another soft linen cloth soaked in wine and oil on top of it; and tie it with double knots, and stitch it to all the parts that are according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two threads, and use woolened ones according to this appearance and be assembled by stitching in the waistband of the braies, and some of the points pregnant at the back, and others at the part where the poignil is; and one other chief at the two angles, and all assembled the restriction in the braier's loop; and never has medicine been this way for the cautery on the sharp edge of iron, and that is when you prick the subtle cautery cultell, and cut the leather of the thighs, and it should be washed as we have said, if the white blood that contains the ague is discovered; if you take the cautery according to this form, and perceive the white as oncines, and burn it at this subtle cautery chaut.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	The patient should try to overcome the challenge in all possible ways; keep the forceps from touching the urethra; be careful that this operation is more effective; and avoid dislocation of the bone, and do not make it too short or long; and if nothing else makes you do something wrong, such as castration or dislocation of the bone or other things, cure what makes you do something wrong, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is not certain about this operation, and does not want to wait for it due to its horror, then if there is a perforation, as I have said, and if you are sure that the mallet is in the right position, then pierce the abscess at the end of the large spatule; then make the perforation long and straight; and if the wound is large, so that all the pus comes out; then put cotton on the wound, and tie it, and leave it to drain the pus from the wound, and treat it as soon as the wound is healed; and if the bladder pushes out any pus into the mouth of the wound, then choose a needle or instrument to remove the pus from the hydropiques, or make it as it is now; and enlarge the wound, and watch that the pus returns, and assemble it after six months or more, and when it is assembled, it will be like before, and then pass the mallet's years.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the hairs
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	However, in the section of this ramification, there are more and more dispositions, and I think it is worth saying that we leave it; I will now tell you the incision and the appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that all abscesses come out by cutting or by arrows; and this is by case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know that the abscess is caused by excessive sour and acrid substance, which is expanded in the hairs, or by percussion; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the blood, and there is no pain, and it is an abscess that is grievous but not mortal, and of foul color, and never comes from an artery or a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is about the vein, if it is pricked by the position of the abscess, when you press on it with your two hands; and you can only touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	This one made of vein is pricked by its position on the expression of touching with two hands, and can well make the size according to this shape, and according to the others; and it is that you cope with the curved end, then it is white in the head, and delivers the suspensory from all parts of the head.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the head is already curved with these curves, then it is necessary that you twist the head and it copes; and if it is in the white, or in the case where the veins are closed, then it is necessary that you deliver all of this curve, and it cope reondement.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is from the lower part of the body, and it comes out completely, and you pull the umbilical cord, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are completed, if you apply the ointment of soft linen in oil and rose, then continue with other treatments as soon as it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the boils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess surrounded by a similar-looking envelope, with the softening of the boils, and the patient suffers greatly as it grows; the treatment for this disease is well known and we will tell you about it according to what was done in the past.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	1. It is necessary that you place the patient on their side, then lift the arm and suspend it over the head, as far as the shoulder, and mark the bones, and extend them; then cut through the soft tissue at each point where the vessels are discovered, and then scrape with a blade from each side; then tie a string or double thread, and fasten it to the first point where the wound came, and fasten it to the other end; then cut along the length of the wound, according to the size of the corset, and in order to remove the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as you would any other, if the vessel does not bleed, and if all the vessels come out, then tie the strings to all the vessels; if the patient loses his norrissement through the incision of the vessels, and seethes and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The signs that this is an extension of the shoulder fracture are: if it is that there are few and far between in long tension, and does not suddenly stop; and it is the pulse equal to the other side until towards the fontanelle, because the fracture presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a section of the shoulder fracture, that it causes pain to come at the beginning, and it is the pulse divers apparans, less than the skin near by, and it is because of the exit of the intestine and the heart at the defuer shoulder fracture.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	1. And no time does the circles descend with the intestine, and it is held in check, and causes great pain to the patient, even when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	2. And in these treatments with iron for pain, because it cannot be escaped.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	3. And in these treatments with iron for pain, because it cannot be escaped.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	For no time is it cauterized with white sulfur as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the line as it is; and if it lags in its course, if it is cleaned with hot water, and what we have said is applied until it bleeds, then the wound is cured by another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia cancer
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made in such a way that the ramie is assembled like the vis, in the same manner that you tie the veins, after lightly cutting them at the base; then cope on, and cure the abscess of that which operates, until the veins cease to bleed; and the cure as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	1. No dislocation ever occurs in the muscles, as we have said, unless it is caused by violence and is then opened; and no intestines are torn, unless they are torn, which is rare and can be repaired at any time; but if the wound is too large in this point, it is believed to be a gallstone or a syphilis, as long as the intestines are torn; and this happens by extension of the gallbladder, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and contracted and the wound is opened and closed; and the cure is made by cauterization, as we have said before; and no cure is ever made in this way: and it is that the patient groans on his back between your hands, then cover the wound with a piece of cloth soaked in cold water according to the amount of three doses; then take away the gallbladder that has been cut off, then put it in the hand and place it on the wounded belly, and press with the other hand on the two wounds according to the pain in the belly, and then remove the hand with the chisel, and do not press on the gallbladder or extend the intestine or any other thing, as we have told you about the cure of the rupture of the intestines; then the cure is made by the cure of the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When you cut the threads, if the wound is cleaned and treated, as soon as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The smoke is constrained, and there is no appearance in the dislocation, and the cauterization is bitter in this place, and further away from health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the threads.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the threads is softened in no time, because the strings that are made are softened, and it can be seen; and it is the craftsman's work to make the cauterization on his back, and cut off the softened leather from the natural leather; then assemble the lips at a seam, and if you see, first the superfluity of the softened leather in three seams or four firmly; then cut between the seams, and treat it as the other wounds, as soon as it is healthy, and cut off the thread.
dou chastrement	1. "dou chastrement" translates
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	1. "dou chastrement" translates to "severe punishment" or "harsh correction". The sentence is saying that corporal punishment is forbidden in our law, and it is important to me not to mention it in this book. There are two ways to do this: one is to make the patient respond when asked about the punishment and its cure, and the other is because we often have to inflict corporal punishment on some animals for our help, such as on goats and sheep, and chairs and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	1. "Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres" translates to "I therefore say that corporal punishment is done according to these methods: either by attraction, or by burning.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the process we are doing, make sure our hands are in good condition with warm water, as long as the coins are softened and during; then take them from your hand, as soon as they are back and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The process of trimming: it is necessary that you sharpen the best knife, and press the leather of the coins to your left hand, then lift the suspender, and cut each knot on the coin as you burn it; and leave no trace of soft or subtle smoke that is on the veins; and this method of trimming is more effective than the one made by attraction, because in attraction nothing happens to the coins, but the best desires luxury; then cure the wound as soon as it is healed.
des hermofrodites	The text you provided does not contain the phrase "des hermof
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermofrodites is according to two ways in men: one if it be that between the two testicles they are open as the nature of a woman, or if it have hair, and never in cutting the urethra.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and it has as a virgin and the testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure of the throat and stomach is if you cut all the swellings and cure them as other wounds; in the second way, men whose urine runs through the urethra, if there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of the temptation
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Temptation is an artificial part that is placed on the natural part, because it is too unsightly to see; and no woman has it as great as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you trim the superfluity of temptation from your hand or nails, and lightly; and do not cut too much, so as to avoid pain, then the cure of another cure until it is healed; and on another char that is in the mouth of the marriage, and the emple, and by chance it jumps, and is according to the appearance of a kow, and for this they called it the ancient "cowardly kow".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it comes to your mind that you copy it, if as we have said, the cure as long as it is healthy.
de erratique	of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Error if it is of the nature of the woman is not well perceived, or the fistula is small; and it is by nature or accident due to disease that came; or it is due to lack of secretion or subtle spasms, and is made in front in the marriage, or in the coste, or in the thigh, or wherever; and defense against conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flow; and knowledge of this if it is by the retreat of the bile.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the head is pressed, if you want to your two or three times.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the head is sore and subtle, and it is near the loins, if you hurry, and it returns: put your two fingers together, and the woman lies on her back, spreading her legs; then the two loins form, as long as the subtle sore remains, and over the dislocations; then take a linen cloth, and some oil, and place it on the head, and make the woman turn each day, so that it does not stick.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sore is hard and fast, then you must cut it off like a piece of dough.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the swelling is of charred nature, if the pain in the onion and the chest; and take the medicines that are cooling blood, as they say, blood of dragon, incense, a bunch of unripe grapes; then make a large poultice, so that the wound may heal; and let it remain long, and make a tent of dry linen; then cure other remedies as long as the patient is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	2. And when in marriage there comes charred nature, if it is found that the copper is enchanted according to this manner, then it is not due to apostacy.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the incision enchanted that is in the marriage, it must not be touched with firmness.
des emorroides	of morbid exudations
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Morbid exudations are openings of veins that without customary cutting, and when they become old, they turn into the lul; and we have said in the division of the appearances and signs, and I will say those that require care.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that morbid exudations and the lul, when they are made in the marriage, and it is not apparent by feeling, if not by the care of iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are in the mouth of the marriage, that can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then remove the nails from the board, and cover it with roots, then dust with medicines restricting blood flow, such as ice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour water on her face for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if the pain comes again, if I put it in a decoction of sumac and juice of grapevine, pomegranate, and gall and similar things, and then take flour of barley, mix with honey and milk, and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	If it swells, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If it does not swell, make the patient lie down on their back and apply a compress to the neck without causing pain; then take the milk, and mix it with the juice of plantain or aloe vera with vinegar, and apply it to the wound.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has healed, if the wound is cured with ointment as soon as it is healthy; and the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the sharpest spicery, if it can cover so that it is as I have said, then the wound is cured as soon as it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Of the patient's abscesses
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come in the patient during marriage, such as chancre and piercing abscesses, herpes, fistulas, and gangrene, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, it is necessary that I treat the gangrene abscess that comes in marriage, which is not like other abscesses but causes the bowel to swell; and if you see the wound, if you look at whether the abscess is still at the beginning of its appearance, and if there is chill and fever, and if it becomes red, you will see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	For this reason, do not hasten to perjure yourself, but make sure the pain is soothed; then place the patient on the table, and have two assistants hold him down while you support his back and assemble his limbs as they fit the leg; let his fingers be expanded, and put his knees at the groin, and tie them well with a gut string; then move the instrument towards the left side, and after that comes the form of the mouth, and it is necessary that when you see the instrument being placed, you fix the first part to know the fitting of the mouth, so that whatever enters through the instrument does not fit more than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if it is larger, then it is necessary to cover the fitting of the mouth with cloths, so that the patient is not grieved; and it is necessary that the instrument's horn be placed at the end, and that it be drawn out.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the abscess opens and it is cut with a clean hand, if it covers the head, apply rose oil or olive oil to the wound; when the boil is visible, place soft tentacles in the wound with oil, and put the tent on the mast and the point of the nail clean and rough with vinegar or bitter herbs that are cooked; then the cure after two days of dressing as it becomes healthy; and never lift the head and the wound with a cloth of vinegar and honey, and then with vinegar or the roots of lis and aristolochum that are cooked; then continue the treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is dressed in the marsh, then it comes that you must not cook with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Mastery is first in the dance, to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see the woman press upon her abdomen, and desire to smell the aroma: therefore, help the children to come forth; and then assure yourself that these children are according to the natural figure, and are from your loins, and the second one with him; and when you see these signs, it comes to gently press upon his belly, if he will soon be born; for when he descends from his head, if he is with his second one, and is monied by good cleanliness, and that which comes otherwise is not natural.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For there is no time that it comes to his bones, and it comes to the heart or the head, and the hands, or it comes to his belly or stomach, and it is converted by chance or his collarbone, and by other malicious figures; if it is skilled in the dance and wise and subtle in these things, and warns against error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures of what one must help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out of its natural place, and the woman gives birth painfully, and the virtues of the child are weak, if it is placed on a pillow or the women hold it; and let its nature be like olive oil or fenugreek, and then dance between its two little spatulums, which is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	1. "And open the second, and push it against his nail as much as the moisture that is in it will allow; and then press the belly of the woman as much as the children descend, and if they do not descend, then it comes to clamping the woman's thigh with flaxseed oil; then place it and secure it with thread, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if it is now time for the children.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	1. "And if the hands come out further, then it comes to lightly reset them a little at a time; and if they do not go in, then place the woman on her side, and lift her feet up; then lower the side on the ground, and mark on the woman that she does not have any pain standing; and if the hands cannot be set further, and the children are dead, then press the hands against the angle that is here before you, extract the child, and reset it as equally as possible.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the child's foot that has its toes
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes to its feet, if it is possible to wear them high; and then the shoe is gradually tightened as much as possible; then he puts on the shoes and extends them slightly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can it leap high jumps, if commanded to wear them, and the other is fastened with conduis; if it leaps, may God help it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not leap if we have said that it should be tightened a little, as much as possible; then it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	If it does not come out as we have described, say if you need to use muscular force of the arm, oil of sutures, and melted gum, and put on this remedy according to the nature of the woman's labor and firmen this application, then fasten it tightly in a cold cloth until it reaches the ribs; when it is moistened at the ribs, make a bandage of iron wire, and insert it, and leave it for an hour; then fasten it on the seat, then draw it out and press the mouth and nose, and press lightly on the stomach because the child is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	The issue of the child from its loins
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if the mother holds her hands close to her neck; then she should tie a string around her neck and hang the baby's feet down, and hold it tightly; and she should fold her hands close to her belly, and press her elbows against her belly, as far as the knees are apart; and if the child does not jump, she should take her elbows and make them form a V, then she should make her belly move forward, and then hold the baby's feet; and she should hold the baby close; and command the woman to pray as long as the child is like this.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the child's birth that comes out of a hand wide
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must have an engineer to bring the hand: if I cannot bring it, then lift the woman, and go; if she cannot go, then make her sit on the bed, and straighten the legs; then relax the muscles that I have told you about; and if it does not give birth, then make her sit on the seat, and study to bring the hand back; and when the child is born, make it natural, and make it smaller, and command that it presses as much as the child can.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the child's birth at its neck, and has expanded its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	1. It is necessary that the wound stains the hand, then it should be turned a little and a little, and lightly; when it is even, if it is applied with the nature of mustard and oil, as we have said, then it is commanded to move a little and a little; when this is done, if it is held in place at the seam, and it is commanded to press; and the seam is tightened.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	2. In the same manner for all the rest.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	3. When it comes to using this method for all the rest, if the second time is applied to your nail, as long as the moisture is dry; and if the children can reach their face and neck, and the blister bursts, it should not be held, and it will hurt the child; then cut off the blister as soon as you have done it, according to how it should be done, and command the woman to press no time: therefore, if it is done lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	The issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is rare for twins to be born multiple times, and never without one being born alive; and this is a strange thing that has not been seen before.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	It is rare for twins to be born multiple times, and they do not survive; I know that they are multiplied, and are shaped by the fate that decides them, which is linked to the bow; and they never issue naturally like all at once, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born gently, if the cure is as we have said, and it is the delicate dance, and done quickly and lightly what it does; and done as it should be for salutation.
de plusors enfans	Of more children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	No times are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and they are all formed as a child by the measurement of the girl's growth, and cover that the dance is all that comes, because by chance it seems to be something like that; if you do according to what is said.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	If you treat the woman of the dead child as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to cut with hands; if it comes to pass that the woman is of sound health and has no accident or death; if it comes to pass that the woman is lying on her back and her shoulders are curved downward, and her knees uplifted; and the midwife applies the teigne of II parts, or she lies in bed if she is not treated for the descent of the child; then anoint the mouth of the mother with oily oils with musk and camphor and linseed meal, and anoint her hands with these oils and oils; then blow lightly on the mother's hands with these oils and oils; then take the leu or the bones that are loose and put them in the mouth of the mother, and watch if the child is descending from its head; if you see the bones in her fingers or in her throat or in her mouth or in her hair or on her chin or in her beard or in her cheek or near her eyes, and the bone is seen in her left hand, and puts the crown between her two fingers of the right hand, and blows it lightly to all hands, and does not touch the bone in any of these ways that we have mentioned, until it comes to pass that it returns to the empty thing; and this is the form of the bone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find the other bone, or if you have skill in it, if the extraction is equal; and then the joint moves equally when moved from both sides, by using your teeth to hold it, as shown in the figure.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If a part breaks off, if there are any of its two bones missing, and the other part is pulled out, and the remaining part is treated; and if it does not break off, then put this bone or higher on the leg, and do this until all of it has been removed.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by stretching, then it is necessary to wrap it around as shown in the figure, until it is completely stretched; then the cloth is placed at the joint of the plantar or the toe, and then you do the same with the other hand, and take off the foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	1. If the child's head is large and it is misshapen at the end, or if there is a sudden assembly of the fontanelle, then you should insert the spatula with pricks between your two fingers and cut the fontanelle and extract the moisture; or you will do it with the instrument called "almidach", which comes with the forceps or chapiter that follows after it; and then naturally make the child's head large; and then pull out the bones with tines, and if the child's head is forced and held in place by the force, as long as the moisture that comes out is not too much, then it will be held in place; and if it cannot be released, if the piece is made from the pieces you have, and if it is enlarged in the belly or deformed at the costal cartilages, then you should percute as much as the moisture comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	If the child is on its mother's breast, if it has a light attraction, and the suckling goes to the mother's mouth, it is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If the child is in the belly or the pudenda, if it covers that you draw it out at the side with your hand; and then the belly or the pudenda, as much as the moisture which it has received; and if the other limb is osteit, and the shoulder is demoure, then bite your hand with the mouth of the mother, and draw it out; then the oncine or the two, and draw it out; and if the mouth of the mother is retreated because of the aposteme chaut which it has come, then do not make any trouble, only manage things that are moist and heavy; and the management emplaustres, and sie in aigue mollifians et amoistans.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its chest, and you place it evenly, then follow what we have said in the living child; and if there is no problem, then the part that is broken will be replaced by pieces, and nothing of the second part will remain.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the child is broken as we have said in the appendices that come with the marriage; and if the wounds come, then if it is made acute by restricting the poultice, and the child is further injured.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly some children had died, then consulted another of this, and it turned out that she would die as well.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some apoplexies came to the head, and they inflamed as soon as they were seen, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the cure, and I thought it would be long, and I could not relieve the pain.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I used strong means of firm attraction, and after a while, some bones were broken, and then more and more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised, because the stomach has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If you thought that it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wished for the pain, and I cut the bones as long as the woman was in better condition; and I saw the woman in long pain for a little while, and it was because of this chapter that, when the master did something strange, I thought I could help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the shoulder back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Then comes the form of pressure, with which we press the books; and when it turns, it turns the shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Whole, the corners must be more subtle and restrictive, and should be made of flat or square wood; and the mouth must be about one-third the size of the eye, and the margins of the branches one-half a palm and a half; and the two joints should be two hinges of this same kind, which are closed on one side and open on the other, half a palm or more; and these two hinges are fitted in the mouth of the shoulder to open when we turn the corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter, can be made of flat ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of the nails; and it has two arms, as you see, like a palm of the hand, and they are wide; and when you open the marriage bed with all the instruments, if you place the woman on her side and the legs overturned, then adjust the arms together in the marriage bed, and hold the head of the instrument between its handles; then operate your hand on all the instruments, as you have done with the nails evenly, according to the quantity you see open the mouth of the marriage bed, until it fits as it was.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	1. This instrument is of various shapes and sizes, and they resemble each other in appearance; when you have seen them, the more you use them, the more you will understand their value for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	2. If you do not know the instrument that you have not seen, because its needs are not easy to understand.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	3. When the second child is born, if it is necessary to command the midwife to release the hair, and then the placenta is extracted with forceps, and the hands are held in the mouth and nose; and if it suddenly jumps for this reason, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, if I can, and make a poultice or compress, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the child's mouth, such as mint, rose, anise, chamomile, calamus, and centaury; all these herbs, or none of them, are cooked or can be made in a decoction over fire; then put a cloth or poultice that can, and the other end in the child's mouth, and press it until the vapors come out of the child's mouth. Then make it firm, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second part is difficult to understand.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment, and does not improve, order the nurse to put her left hand in oil of sesamum or musk, and then draw it out naturally, and want the second part; and when she finds it, press and extend it slightly, so that the child does not resist during extraction; but it is necessary to move lightly to the right and left, and then carry it out. If it comes and dries up.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	1. If the mouth of the woman is dry, we have said that the cure is to firm and fumigation of herbs; and if it does not improve at all from what we have said, then keep to what we have given you; but what is in the mouth of the woman, tie it to the woman's thigh, then cleanse it with antiseptic ointment; if it burns and returns, and comes back stronger, but if it becomes smelly in the stomach and head, and causes the patient to vomit.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	2. If it comes down then, then the fumigation should be done with safe herbs: no of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cresson and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is such that it burns the woman to retain the flow and the second wind if this is needed.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it seems like a candle, and one should place the head subtly in its nature, and the large eyes over the fire; and it is the fumes from the charcoal, and the ash as much as it is gray, and another one begins to appear.
de percier lou fondement	to break the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not break the foundation percled, and if they have burned a little subtle facial hair, then it is necessary to go to the dance where that facial hair perceals its duty, and does not perceal any spatulation agut, and girls the plastering that it does not touch; then put on a fine moil in wine and oil, then the care of the ointment as much as it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not remain, if you put or pinch a thorn in it, and leave it hands free, and it is soon seen when the children see it come into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this disorder from a wound or abscess; if it comes suddenly: if you cure it, if as we have said of the thorn.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of deep foundation.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from deep foundation are nodulation, and grow like those that come from the bottom of the foot, or in the space between the two parts; and when this nodulation is old, it moves, and becomes moist and bloody or subtle, and never are these fistulas permanent; they are known by the fact that they are caused by egestion or ventosity when the patient evacuates, and by chance some of them fall.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	If pustules are present on the bladder, and half of the vagina; and they reach the joint of the coxae, and to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	If you do not know if the fistula is at the base, and it is not: then you should use your index finger or a thin needle or a piece of iron in the fistula when it does not have any tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	If there is tortuosity, then you should use a small tent of platinum or horsehair, as long as you feel the tent or the hair in your hand; and if you do not feel it, and there is no emission of gas, vomiting, or diarrhea, as we have said: be careful that it does not perforate; if you hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula is present in the uterus or carried by the urine, and if the urine suddenly escapes, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is felt at the joint of the thigh, and if it causes pain in the knee; if it is that it goes down the bowels, and there is no medicine to stop it by rubbing; and in these fistulas there is no cure other than labor, and vanity of the proud who get involved.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not very ancient and not very modern, with hope of salvation by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient suffers between his hands on his back; and he raises his legs until they are against his thighs, and his thighs are inclined towards his belly; then a tent of rain, or of plank, if it has tortuosity, as long as you see or the test comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain at the base, then it is necessary that you hold onto your index finger, and if it seems that he is trying to grasp it, then it is discovered whether between your thumb and finger there is a pulse or not, and you should feel if it is strong; if not, then it cannot be saved.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is impossible to heal all wounds, but this is rare; and if you can, then it is done by making the cautery subtle according to the size of the fistula, as said before; and you should put a piece of cloth in the fistula as soon as it starts bleeding from the base; and do this twice or three times until you feel that these charges are firm, which resemble a pen's tip; then the dressing of softened bandages is applied, as long as the charge remains firm, then the dressing of ointment is applied and smeared.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is in good health, so be it.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If the patient is not sane, so be it. If he tries to enter, and does not penetrate, and comes between your hand and the wound with a thick covering of cloth or chalk, you will see the fistula at this point where the covering ends; if the end of the cautery is at the beginning of the fistula, before the tent, and then burn it afterward as it goes to the top of the tent; it will be delivered from the tent, and will hurt; then mold the handles that look like a feather's tip, and none will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If it does not harm you, and cuts between you and the wound, whether by fire cauterization or medical burning.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cauterization has two effects: it knows the surety of these burned things, and the stoppage of blood and the corrosion of moisture; then the care of soft wounds in burrs or in the belly, as long as they bleed, and it will be the charred in the belly; then cure the plague of scalds caused by sour ointments, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	If a fistula comes suddenly from the depths, and it is moved away from the chest, if the head of the shoulder is dislocated, and investigate this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and enter II is the cloth or the skin, or it is near to pierce, if not had been but a way of engagement and hope, by the administration of one of the III ways: or you cauterize as we have said, or you cope jusc’a fons, or if you put if tents and cure as we have said; and do not come too far in front, that you do not cover the fundament, and take away the excretions by the desired sense; then the cure, as we have said; by chance if it is healthy, or you remove that covering and mundane it then when it is coped with the fundament, or by tent or another appointed instrument; then mold the char that is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to prolong the fistula in the part defuers the fundament: if it is still a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And no time are fistulas made in this way: and when you reach the fistula with the tent, it is either costly or difficult to make it deep enough into the skin, if you use a tent according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I cut it in two, and cut the tent all along the fistula as far as it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is persnant in the margin of the deep part of the fistula, then cut the thread of the pertused one as far as you reach the depth; and take out the head of the thread, and assemble the two ends, and draw them together and leave one or two; and keep it once, until the threads cover those that are between two, and chief; then cure the wound as much as it is sore and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you try in all possible ways that you can, it will not succeed too much.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not recommended to make the incision too large, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the sharp spines that were used to make the fistula is either from one or two, and partly and trenching; and on the other hand, not, because it cannot be cut or must not be cut, as you see in this:
des emorroydes	of the bones.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Bone fractures are in two ways: either they are cut at the foundation, like resin grains, and become small and large, and are cut again to the bone, and become one or more, and are deformed at the foundation and in the head of the bone; but those that are deformed have little moisture, and are cut again with a little golden acid or a little wine vinegar, and have the color of coral; and the cure of those who have cut the bones is that you command the surgeon to squeeze out on the body as much as the bones are deformed, and when they become firm, and the children appear; if you hurry, and he can take them with his nails, or hold them in his hand, then cut at their roots; and if the uncut ones cannot be held by their moisture, then lay them on the back, or on the cloth, or on a piece of linen, and cut them away, and powder some hot powders that are in the leech of cauterization; or you can cauterize as it is said in the chapter of cauterization, and cure others as much as they are healthy; and if the deformed ones cannot issue, then clysterize the surgeon with a clyster knife sharp and spicy, so that it may issue openly; and if the mouth is not preened, and the flesh is deformed at the foundation, if it is the light cure, and the wound is open, then preen the mouth and the flesh with the light cure, and cure as we have said, and that it may be healthy and not fear the incision of iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If it is necessary to mend the seam according to this manner: take one thread, thread it through an awl, and then draw the thread out and feel the awl from another side, and turn the two ends of the other two threads around the awl, and if they are large; and then tighten the thread, then knot it, and draw out the awl, and do this to all the others, and leave the excess suture for the blood to drip; then put the foundation thread in oil or wax, and put it at the foundation, and command the patient to lie down; and then leave it as long as it holds, and when they are hard, if the cure is of ointment and other cures, as soon as they are healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	1. "If the wound is deep or has a firm base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	2. "Many times the wound is deep in the intestine, and by constricting nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no use.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	3. "If it is necessary to cut a splint or the nail of your finger, which does not allow moisture; then treat as much as possible until it is soft enough; and if it cannot be soaked, then continue to shave more forcefully than before, until it is clean, and is burned; then treat as much as possible.
dou fremit	4. "If the wound moves
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Antonin's is a small growth that must be removed from the chest, and it does not stay in place; and never the surgeon's force can make it stay, and it feels like death to touch it, and it comes throughout the chest, and more with the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the remedy is that if you take a nail from an eagle's wing, or a vulture's wing, and place it on the vibration, as long as the purple circle surrounds the vibration completely; then turn your hand around all the nail until you cover all around the vibration, and press it down, and hold it in place, and pull out the vibration from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	If you see, if I make this of a copper or iron needle according to this form, and it is subtle and thin and true:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	If you do not perceive, but hold it with the other hand, and press: If you see, if the cauterization causes movement, as in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the form of the cauterization
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never is made of silver or alloy, or of melted and ground gold; and never is made of these tweezers small and large, according to which they are found.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those that are used in the care of children and the weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cauterization small and large if it is made wide, or the belly is made according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if it has a separation or the belly is made wide, as you see, and the child's head is dislocated; and there is a percussion at one of the costals, and at the other; and the belly or puts the medicine into a beast's vesicle or a clove bag, and all around the percussions are seen, and between each percussion I must have an espaice, then I draw the thread through each pertus I must have a fil strong, then assemble the belly like a chevre; and when the medicine is given, if it lies at the end of a strong thread, then cauterize; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	1. And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or lanolin or some other substance, then gently apply the ointment; then the physician should take his two hands and gather them together as much as possible, so that it is all comfortable, then remove the bandage, and ease the patient's legs to the parietal bone, and if the medicine seems to be working, then as much as it can; and if the patient sleeps a whole night, then it will be more help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if you dislocate the hip due to disease of the abdomen, and the physician sees that it is healing, then if it recurs as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhage is from the foundation, or the gash, whether it is the clitoris also subtle as in the child; and this is the form of a subtle gash that is drawn when the skin is stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said the treatment of wounds in the division; and you will say the cures of hands and medicine, according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the means by which they are made, and according to the manner in which they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by cutting with a lancet, or a knife, or a sword, or a needle, or similar things; or they are made according to the means of the limbs, if it is a plague that chops at the collar, or the head, or the chest, or the stomach, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds on the neck, because the memory will come to your chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or the bone is not broken, if it is due to cutting or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of apoplexy: if the latter comes sooner from the head itself than from the wound, and is healthier on the other side of the part that was cut; and avoid the malady's excess of wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not become healthier, if the meat is anemic, and does not drink wine, and does not eat fat; and puts on the wound, if it apostles, it should be oiled with lavender oil only, or with vinegar steeped; and if it has not apostated, if it puts it on the wound, it is fresh at all its source, and it is not moved by the air, dust, which I will say a little later; and if it is moved, if it puts on some ointments, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	When the wound is large, like a needle's eye and its surroundings, and the lips cannot be reassembled by tents, if they can be assembled by stitching, like I will say for abdominal wounds, by sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone, it may be, and holds only by a pin; then treat the wound with medicine, restore the hardness in the leather of the thigh, and order the patient to eat large meats, such as testes and cooked flour, as well as chicken, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you have a wound or an ulcer, and it does not reach the bone, if the whole surface is covered with leather, and it becomes sore, then treat it; and if arteries are in the wound or vessel, which cannot be cut without causing pain, if the patient wants to cut them, if the wound is delayed by a thread; and if this does not help, if the cauterization is done.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you apply this powder that smells like the one that was used to move it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take a part of incense; burn three parts of dragon's blood; three parts of live chalz, and the fine powder, and apply to the wound, and draw it out as it comes together and joins with all its sand; then apply the powder well, and leave it to drip if it does not swell, because the medicine is only applied as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never once has it been done solely with fire, when there is no candle or holy water from the dragon, but that the art has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the art has moved the wound, immediately in this way; but use some digested powder, or make some flour from oats and honey, as much as it will bow; then continue with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, if it is picked up with fine tweezers; and I will tell you about this later, the major fractures.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound of the shoulder
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	A wound comes from the shoulder, it is simple if there is no difference between the two, but if it is a wound from the collarbone or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the collarbone, if there is no other choice but to leave the treatment alone and nothing restrictive, because it hurts and pulls them back; and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the more painful limbs; but if the medicine is suitable, like cold water washed, and mixed with olive oil, and cleansed with cold water again, and other piercings according to this method, and moistened.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, if it is infected, then the cure depends on its health.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wounds are deep, if they are infected, then the cure depends on its health. If the artery is cut, and blood flows out, if it can be stopped, and the wound cleaned, and cauterized as best as possible; if the spine of the neck is cut, or the jaw, and the head guarded, as the flesh goes, if the jaw is cut near the neck, and it is put back in place according to its natural shape; then the wound is cleaned, and any remaining pieces are removed, and the care of decaying parts as much as possible, if it has affected the bone, if there are pieces of bone, if they are taken out as soon as possible, and those that cannot be taken out, if it allows the wound to drain, and becomes inflamed and allied to the issue; if the wound is fresh, if powder is applied as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there is an abscess in the wound and it has been drained, then the treatment is as I have described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of the arrow or of the spear
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from an arrow or spear, and the wound is gushing blood, then look at the wound for signs of death: if it is mortally wounded, and if it is fresh at all its sutures, then do not put anything in the first hour, but rather apply poultice and wrap it with cloth to absorb moisture; but if you do not have poultice, then put cotton in the wound to soak up moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four or more hours, unless spasms or tremors from the chest cause discomfort; and when you see the bones in good position, you can say that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat the wounds with remedies and other remedies as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot be healed, perform further operations with clean hands that it has made; as it should be done.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is of incision or thrust, and it is simple, or on the back, if the treatment is in front; if it is large, it is dressed with a bandage; if it is small, it is powdered; and if it is in the bone, and it is cut into pieces, if they wish to open the wound, and the pus comes out if they are dry; and if they do not come out, let it be left to ooze if it is squeezed; and other wounds have the same judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre". The translation of
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre". The translation of "dou derrompement dou ventre" is "great dislocation of the abdomen".
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no harm to the intestines, and it is not a difficult matter to set, this is one of the two ways: either by the size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is twisted due to the blow.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is swollen, treat it in this way: soften a sponge or a damp cloth only, or wet and scented and spiked, and gently lather the intestine as much as it can be unwound; and never do this again, and it will become dry and slippery.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	When you see the bile departing, if the intestine is rough or sharp and curved, it is because this is causing the entrance to be narrow; and if it cannot enter, then a small wound is made with the instrument on the lip, and the blood clots are removed; and the first cure is to cut the size, which should not be cut without great necessity or pain; and this is the reason for the scars: if it is torn from the corner and does not heal, and thus forms:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine springs back, if it is reset according to its natural form in its own place, if you are able to do this, then it is well.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower abdominal region, if you intend to make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his chest; and if it is in the lower abdominal region, then he should raise his chest and hips higher than the surrounding areas, and thus the wound in the one part will be higher than the other; and it is necessary to manage this in large and dirty wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wound is small, and it is in the lower abdominal region, if you intend to make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his chest; and if it is in the lower abdominal region, then he should raise his chest and hips higher than the surrounding areas, and thus the wound in the one part will be higher than the other; and it is necessary to manage this in large and dirty wounds.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I carried the intestine and when it had been out for 24 hours, there was a wound of 15 years, I treated it, and it became healthy again.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the midwife showed him the wound that would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat it with any medicine because there was none in the lemon tree or anywhere else, not even herbs; and I washed more than twice a day under the lavender water until it became healthy again.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you will tell me the two most common ways of sewing: take the needle, and pull out the thread at the end of the piece; when it has passed through the eye of the needle, if you hold it with your thumb or the tip of your finger, and pull it out from another part of the uncut thread, and the threads will be even; and the seams will be as good as those made by a tailor, once you have held one end with one finger, and pulled it back with another, until the seam is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, known as Galien's proper method, is used if no other method works, where the two parts come together naturally and one end of the needle is placed over the other, in this manner: insert an eyelet or needle point close to the edge, and make sure that the other end of the needle is only slightly protruding, and leave the two ends of the needle; then turn the eyelet, and make sure it is perpendicular to the part that is being sewn, as the two ends of the needle; then make sure the other two ends are perpendicular to the part that is being sewn, using the other needles that are on the opposite side; and this is the most common method of sewing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	When Galen hears this word, and no one testifies to it, one must sew the belly with two needles, or one in each; and one should insert one needle on one side and the other on the other, in the manner of those who are crooked; and when the rupture is near the belly, if it is more painful than others in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is if it is like the judgment of other wounds: and if you treat the fresh wound with all its pain, unless it has moved, then reinsert the intestine and the gut; then put some powdered charcoal on the wound, and if it has moved, then apply any ointment that is present, as long as the wound bows; then tie the string, and be careful not to cut the suture, and the mirror; then cure the wound as you would with other wounds, until it is healthy; and if you have no medicines, then put some, as much as it can come out of the belly, soft cloth, and rub it twice on the belly until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no other skill in other positions than wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound is not communalized as members principals, then it comes that you lightly oil with ointment of chalor or rose oil, and put on linen and remove the bandages, and soak them; and if there is pain or inflammation in the belly, and many times it happens, if the clysterize with red wine, and at the same time the inflammation comes to the intestine; and the perce is made, and sutures are used that when it's the big intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The small intestine that is called "young" cannot heal until it is unwound, and this is due to the tightness of the knots that tie it, and the subtlety of all the corporeal parts, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the gash jumps from the wound, if it is reset as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it becomes thin and turns black, then you must lie down the black leu which is in the wound, because it has veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ligaments, and pull the arrows out of the part around the wound until the extraction is aligned with the gash as it jumps, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the bursting of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ruptured and the wound is small, if it can be restored with a few stitches, because I have seen that some were healed by a lance in the abdomen; and it was the wound on the left side of the stomach, and it became a fistula and contained the excrement and vomit, and I treated it according to what I could, and did not stop subtleizing until it was cured, and I called it the lesion.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it sutured, I doubted that the patient had not suffered in his belly; but he had no pain, but it took longer to make better arrangements, to drink and eat; and they said to no experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, one must sew it in this way: first stretch the testicles as much as possible, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the mouth has overturned, put it in between the lips if it can draw the mouth back; then close the testicle, and it holds if it cannot slip, then make another spasm in the same way that before, as long as the wound is all distorted; and close the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	1. If the root of the bowel is inflamed and causes no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a thread as fine as a hair from an animal, in this manner: take the root of this thread of bowel that is full of dirt, then tie it to the root of this thread I fil of lin subtil, then thrust the thread through the needle, and through the intestine, and knot the thread at the rupture; and this manner of stitching is not worse than according to the way of love and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the small intestines, if it does not heal or become healthy, then it should be subtle.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	That all wounds and abscesses, when they heal, if they are called universally "fistula", and also when they are hairy and thin-browned.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the truth of nodation that must be hard and brawny, or one feels pain, and is as hairy as the tail of an ostrich; and never in a clear jump, and sometimes thick; and never sparse, and sometimes full; and never small, and sometimes large; and I have seen this in the division of wounds, that all wounds that are not healed, and have no pain, are only due to one of the seven causes: it is to know, by the slight pain or corse; or by malice; or because the pain is too deep, and touches the lips, which does not leave pain; or there are too many wounds; or the lesion is porris, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or because the property in the region is delayed digestion, and delayed health, and flees by nature; or there are vowns or bones: and I have shown all these causes and their signs and cures with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’ils sont lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les e
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Here comes the translation for the second sentence: "Saiches that fistule have in all members of the body; for they have fistules that come with great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the syfac, or at the intestine, or at the vessie, or at any of the costes, or at the espinee dou dos, or at any joint of the hands or of the feet; and if it comes to the property of the member principal, and they are similar.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	1. And all the fistulas of this kind are of good cure, and only labor and ignorance; and if there is no fistula that does not come to the place I have said, and you are the physician, and you see it, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, as you wish; and if the fistula is bent, then take a fine tent of silk, for the threads will not enter into the bend; and if the fistula is in hands pertused and you do not find it well with tents, then take one of the pertused hands, for the moisture from one hand to another makes it straight and clean; then you will know if it is bone or nerve, and it is chevie in front, and ask the patient to tell you the pain he feels when you press his hand with yours, and the hand or where it feels the pain; and when you really know the hand or whether it is far from the joint, or the nerve, or the artery or vein, or any of the hands that I have mentioned, if the cure according to what I have said, and the false parts that are warped; and then the cure as long as it is healthy, and if the fistula is well straightened in the right place, then you should take fine tents of medicine ague, and wind them around the mouth of the fistula, as much as you press, then you should put ointments in clean jars, as soon as the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is exuded from the fount; and then you should put unguents in healthy char, as soon as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy by this, then the cauterization is as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then the cure.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	1. If the limb does not cause pain or discomfort, or if it is a principal limb, as we have said; and if the bone is discovered, and it becomes corrupt and black, as long as the corruption remains, then the care of such things is done until it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and the limb bows so much that it is no longer in its place, then you must know that you are not strong enough to do it: if it dislocates and you want it as much as you can while you are there, and all the corruption is removed, then restore the bone; and if it becomes healthy, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	1. If the corruption is too deep, you do not know if it will heal; if there is no other means than sharp pain in nature; and if it has small corrupt bones, and you cut them with the instrument, if it can be straightened with the instrument, and if there are many more, then do not leave any; and if moisture makes it worse, and there is no error or fear, then coping and moisture and char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	1. If you do not treat the wound within an hour, then place a poultice made of something moist on the wound and leave it until the pus is drained from the bones; if the bones are large, such as a thigh or knee, then only allow the corruption to spread as much as the blackness covers, then restore the wound; and if a large part of the wound becomes corrupt and turns into bone, then cover it with soil and cover all the corruption, and then treat it as much as possible; and I will tell you about a fistula that came out in her leg, so that you can use it as an example and help in your practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The text describes the case of a young man who had a pain in his leg for a certain number of years, which was caused by congestion in the chest. The matter came to the leg, and he fell into a large abscess, but there was no cause found to open it. However, the pus overwhelmed the leg so much that it became a fistula, and infected wounds appeared on the belly and chest. He was treated for two years, but he had no knowledge of the art of hands, only seeing his leg and the medicines used to cure it, as well as the corruption caused by the wounds. The chest of the young man became red, and he had a yellowish tint.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I sewed a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some came into contact with all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then began to treat the wound with poultices of herbs, and could not stop the corruption in the bone; I knew that this was from a corrupt bone, and made sure there was no other corruption, as I had found; then I began to restore the wound with poultices of herbs for a long time, but could not stop it; then I discovered the bone again, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and treated it, and then I set the bone; but I could only do so when I came across a piece of bone, and the rest of the bone was all corroded, then I restored it with poultices; it became healthy and cured, and did not want to restart the operation due to the inability of the surgeon to bear the pain and the fear of death that I had caused him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For it is often that the evacuation of blood is done, but it was completely healthy, and a hard char was found on the bone, and it was in good position and did not have any harm or any other contrary at all, nor in the air nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in no part of the limb, and it comes to this: take the lines, and draw the end of the line at the opening of the bone, and command that it does not extend above; and put another line of linen larger than the first, and lay it on the char that is out of the bone, and tie it at the head, so that you can pull the corrupt char away from the bone, and cut the char where you see it stuck, so that it does not hurt the char; and put a table or a board on the bone to cover the corrupt char; and let it be as corrupt as you can see and feel, and do it again as many times as you can.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in a large or small area, if you manage to cut through it all; then take a knife and separate one part from another of the corruption, and so continue until you reach the end of the corruption; if the corruption is in the joint, if the joint is corrupted, and it is the bone or it contains another part; if the corruption is in the continuation of the joints, if there is no other angle than a sharp one; if the corruption is on the hand or on the foot, if it is very strong, but it is necessary that you investigate this corrosion as it opens; and you can cut it in all the ways you want, but the bone or the flesh will not oppose you; and you should know that the incision and the scars on the bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the joints, and their roughness and subtlety, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this it is necessary to adapt each appearance of the instrument to your own; and you should know that the work will show the instrument that you have made, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases; if you manage the instrument that you have made according to what it should be.
dou feu	The first line of the text, 
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The patient's body parts turn black after the fire cautery, which can be due to either heat or poison. If the medicine has any effect on the corrosion of the member up to the limb where the burn comes, it is likely that the member is defective. The signs are that the member becomes black, and if it seems like it is burning, it will turn black all over the member; if you do not catch it in time, it will spread to other members, and everything will be affected. If the burn is at the root of the toe, and the cope (a type of bandage) does not come off easily with pressure from any poisonous animals such as scorpions and wasps, and the corrosion is at the tip of the toe, then the cope should be changed immediately.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes to the hand, if it is the joint, and that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, if the cope is on the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is the death, and it is not worth being afraid of as much as the quantity of his virtue; and then do what the corrosion comes or pain: if it comes in the first joint, if the cope after the other joint; and if it comes pain, if the cope is on all the pain; and if it goes up the leg, if the cope is on the shoulder joint; and if it comes from the knee, if there is no other engine than to make the patient die; and how the cope or the soil of the member is, if it is that you tie and extend some measures on one of the laces that are between the two laces far apart, and others on the other lace behind, and then give the char that is between the two laces a wide space, as long as the bone is discovered; then the cope or soil, and put of each part one fold of lin, if it does not touch the healthy bone, and goes to the patient another wound and aposteme.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	When the joint is dislocated due to trauma, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	1. No time comes with an abscess in the thigh, and it lasts as long as there is a great gathering of bones; and then it bursts and perforates, and in a jump the bones are shattered, and like some violent blows; and the skin that is covered is as delicate as silk, and does not touch the bone, nor the nerve, and such disease is called "inflamed" but is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone in front, it is called "fistula"; and the skin if it touches the entire covering, and at the same time when it is delicate, like some silk; and it does not corrupt for its own corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	1. If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture and cannot stay in place, first reset it.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the belly is in its place, do not let it wander; and if you do not cover the skin of the belly as you see, if it appears in such a way that the belly follows the lowest part of the body where it is, because when the belly is in its place, do not let it wander and if you do not cover the skin of the belly as you see, if it appears in partial manner: that the belly moves lightly, and does not leave any part of the belly; and take consolidating medicines to put out the pain of the patient, and they are on the drapery of lin that covers all the pain; then cover as much as possible the wound of the belly I the larger part of the wound the other drapery according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the belly to align the belly, and do not leave the great drapery until once more; and the one who is at the wound of the belly often for the wound, and see what comes from the belly, whether it is venom or little or much, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or name, and if it has apoplexy or not, and when your medicine is extended and you see the nature that leaps on the wound of the belly, if you see that the breasts are already sore, and approach the health; then leave the morning, or the evening, and when you dress the wound, if it changes the other drapery, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is possible that the breasts do not lactate.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the venoms become subtle after a long journey, if you do not despair of your health, it is because your health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	Because there are venoms that become subtle after a long journey, if you do not despair of your health, it is because your health approaches. And if breasts do not lactate in time for their wounds, and those that make the opposite, and if breasts become wet and hard after a long journey, if you do not lactate, and if the nipples are late to erect, and are parched, then if the ointment is definitive, which is made of dry earth and moisture in substance and dry in virtue, it is the definitive ointment, and it is made with rose oil, and the wine is mixed in equal parts; then it is cooked and used; and the same makes honey increased when the ointment is definitive is not present, or you take mercury and aloe and incense, and the broth, and the powder on the honey as soon as it is near the fire; and then in glue and drapel, and it is applied to the breast, and never has a physician long used aristolochum long and celestial roots, which is also like flour and centaury; and in simple or complex: grind them, and make powder, and mix with the honey that I said, and apply; and if the cure is long, and is not cured by this cure, then you see that the corruption is in front, and makes an impression in the bone, or hard members, or limbs; if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the toe
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Gangrene is an abscess that develops from the toe, either due to a cut in the finger or thumb, or by chance in other parts; and when it becomes infected, if it is not attended to, then the abscess ruptures and seeps blood as it reaches the root of the toe, and in some cases it reaches the bone, causing great pain, and the head of the toe becomes large and the color turns black.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut off all the excess that has grown from the toe, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. The fire cautery is a great help when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the skin, and it begins to prick, and burn, then you should cut away the part of the nail that points at the skin, and bite it off, and cut it high, and cover it with a piece of soft, light material, and put on the medicine for burns and corrosives to heal everything; then the cure of wounds as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	2. And if the corrosion is in the bone, if it is cut, and taken out, because as much as the bone corrupts and is, so it cannot be healed; and if you see the other corrupt, if you cut it in the same way as said before, then the cure as soon as it is healthy; and if it is hard, and bites, and it feels great pain, then you should heal it first; then cover the nail with a piece of soft, wet cloth when cutting across the skin, and make sure that the cut does not reach the bone that is below the nail, because the patient will feel too much pain; and if this happens, then put something on which soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain that comes from the elbow
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The elbow dislocation that occurs in some men by chance is very common, and it often happens when the bone is broken, and never when the joint is intact, and no one is born with this defect, and no one is born with this defect in our family.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	The elbow dislocation that occurs in no one is not static, and the one who dislocates at the joint is often static; the size of the one who is dislocated is lighter, in a similar way: the size of it in its root is like that of a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	The one who dislocates at the joint is difficult to cure: if you hold it tightly.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the case of a dislocation that occurs from the rear, if you first cover the joint completely with a clean cloth, then cover the bone with another clean cloth, and then treat it as needed until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The causes that come are either born, or caused by wounds, or caused by burns, or caused by other things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you cover the wound with a cloth that can be repaired according to its natural forms; then put between two sheets or soft cloths moistened with olive oil, so that they do not stick together; or you can put between two pieces of fine linen as long as it is wet, until it is healed, just as it comes.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	The patient's hand comes to none of its two sides with the finger, if the pain is as hard as it should be.
des vils	of warts
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Warts are large and overgrown, filled with melancholic superfluity, that come in more and more members of the body; and more come in the legs of those who go to prayer and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must never administer any purging of colic, and then the right of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is according to two methods: one is on the pain, and it carries out the black blood; and the other method is that you let the vein, and it draws all future.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	1. The size of the wound is according to this method: first, touch the hot leg with the pointed end of the needle, until the end is not subtle, then draw the leg back into the abscess cavity; then, cut the vein in one place or two or three, of a large size, then lift and tie off the black blood to your hand, from one part to another, as much as possible without causing too much pain to the patient's strength; then lie down, and command that it should become meat encrusted with black hair; and resume the evacuation and cleaning of the wounds when the veins are flat, and must be done by the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. The treatment for cramps is as follows: massage the leg of the patient, if it has hair, then wash it with warm water, and make the leg red and hot until it turns pink, and if there is no fire, then heat it in fire, and then place it on the long part of the bone at the knee or in the area of the ankle; then wrap the leg with linen, and burn the skin wherever it appears when touched, until it turns red and black, and if it seems like a thick rope, then burn it off until it is raised with linen, and then place it on another bone, three times; then burn the linen along the skin wherever it appears, and then lift it to the knee as you have done, and place it on another bone, as you have done before; then cut another piece, or more if you have them, and lift it, and then place it on the second part, and then pull and place it on the third part; then remove the tailor from the tailor, as much as it can hold, and place it on the second part; then remove the tailor from one size to another, until it is all done, and then place it on the second part; if you cannot lift or pull it, and a needle is stuck in the hard part of the bone twice, then lift it with the needle, and place it on the second part, and then cut and place it on the third part, and if you cannot lift or pull it, and it is stuck in the bone, and turn your hand from one side to another as much as it can; and make sure it does not burn, because if it burns, and it cannot be lifted or pulled, and it comes near to the patient, and when you have treated it, then put a piece of linen with fine hair on the wound, and let it soak in wine and olive oil.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	When the limb is tightened and tied together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if you intend to cut it roughly, but do not cut it completely, then the thread should be placed as we have described before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	If the piece of iron that is used to tie the limb is not sharp enough to cut the vein, but does not cut it completely, then the thread should be placed as we have described before. This is the shape of the iron:
de la voinne civile	of the vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the ground where there is no moisture; and by chance it may be found in other places than in the legs, and this comes from the fat that comes from the skin, as it does from the serpent's belly and turns, it is found between the skin and the char.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if signs of the beginning of this wound appear, it is that there will be a very large inflammation in the leg, then it changes color, and the wound begins to ooze, as if it were a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If the wound is opened, it comes to pass that you wrap it around with a piece of cloth from one and a half inches to two and a half inches wide, and around the leg, and leave the cloth there until the wound is no longer red, if the cloth covers the wound and the now, and if it is too long, if you cut off a part and wrap the remaining part around the wound, and do not cover it with another piece of cloth until it is all used up; for if you do, it may cause infection and gangrene or putrefaction of the flesh, and for this reason it is necessary that it be treated as little as possible and quickly, and there should be no remaining part of the wound after it has been treated with V paumes of long, or X, and I had one such case where it was X paumes long, and if you wrap it, if you see any holes or perforations, and the cloth presses against the flesh, then all should be cut off; and whatever matter is decomposed, and all medicines are avoided for food, then the cure is performed like the apostemes.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And no time the hands are wet, and at the same time when it opens in the joint of the shoulder or the other, and a drop of blood comes out, and it falls; cure the patient as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of those that are born between leather and hide.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our country "beef disease," because it often occurs on the shoulder and is a small worm that runs between leather and hide, going up and down the body, and causes pain in all parts of the limb, as it goes through the skin or not, and jumps; and it is caused by some humors, such as snakes, worms, and ascarides or intestines; and one doubts its malice, because when it goes through the body, it goes to the head, and enters the oil, by chance, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the wound healing and drying, if it cannot be otherwise than when it will: if it comes to pass that you read the leg and bone, and cut them as closely as possible, then sew it up and leave it, and it will heal, if the cauterization by fire is done as we have said, until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does, if it comes to pass that it reaches the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming towards the oil, if the hair is drawn back from it, then sew it up, and leave it; and it will heal. And it is necessary to use the caustic with the mouth of medicines soluble for the humors of the body, and avoid foods that are injurious to the stomach as nourishment.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that comes from ventosity
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakitir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and spreads from member to member; and I see what I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called a woman patient, and I saw my arm, and I saw a small flesh in the vein of the other arm; and then afterwards, I saw it rise as if it were a snake to the shoulder, faster than anything, as if living silver when it cut from there to another; the pain left that arm and moved to the shoulder, and then a little later, it spread throughout the body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that she dislocated it further inside the chest, just as I see.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I am surprised to see it move from joint to joint, as I have never wanted this disease to occur in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Indeed, I wanted to prevent any discomfort in the joints, but I did not want this. In fact, it is because I see it in women; I thought it was because the woman had dry skin, and the veins were exposed, and because of this appearance of constraint; but I did not know that this is true for those who are delicate and have moist skin and veins replanted.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see the cure for this disease, and the patient feels pain, if it opens as we have said, if the ligaments and bones are well-matched, and then continue until the constraint in the joint is reduced; and cauterize the joint; and if you do not see it with your eyes, if the cure of those who cause the constraint is like the fetid pills and serapeum pills, and similar ones.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the muscles of the body where they are located or they cause pain.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of arrows includes those with large points, and small ones, and sharp ones, and blunt ones; those with angled edges, and those with curved shapes, and those with pieces; and those that pierce any member in different ways: either through the principle member, such as the head, chest, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, uterus, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	If the arrow pierces any of these members, and you notice the signs of death that I will tell you later, it means that you should not remove the arrow immediately, as death comes later in other ways; and if the sign does not seem to you, and the arrow is not far from the wound, then the hole should be cleaned and the wound treated.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	The patient experiences severe headache when the arrow pierces the bone, and the sudden shock that is felt in the eye is when there is scotomia and dizziness, and vertigo and pain in the limbs, inflammation and soreness of the tongue, spasms and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of cold; and by chance it does not affect the nose or ears; and by chance it affects the speech and voice; and a sudden shock of the white wound-like scar resembles pustules, and like the bite of a horse; and this sign appears if you seek treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is still inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the shoulder when it pains or aches is that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it is twisted in something hard, without being empty; and by chance the shoulder becomes as stiff as the leg, and in a short time dark blood comes, and there is cold sweat and cold blood, and convulsions: then one feels doubt that the death is near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arm that is swollen is that there are no plains of ecchymosis from the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the face turns pale, and he spits up blood high and cries out with pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the shoulder is dislocated in the covering of the chest, it can cause the small ribs; and it causes great pain and suffocation; and all the members of the shoulder move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the shoulder is dislocated in the stomach, by chance, jumping from the wound nothing of the meat undigested.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the shoulder is dislocated in the stomach, and by jumping point of the intestine out, if there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the shoulder is dislocated in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out, and the patient feels great pain: dying wounds.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if the face and neck and shoulder and arm and spine and back and ribs and chest and thighs, and the seeming member, are safe according to other dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the artery is in the wound or not visible, and it is not bleeding, as I will tell you if I know, because you are doing this.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I have seen one man's arm cut off at the elbow by a knife or an axe: I tried to save it, and the graisse of the ear was removed successfully.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And there came to him a sudden pain in his arm that he fell into the grease of the oil, and the arm was set, and it could not be reached beyond the shoulder, and it was as large as a Turkish bow, at all times making him feel light-headed with his ears; the shoulder was healthy, and he did not have any accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And there came to him a sudden pain in his neck from a collar, and it was the Arabian collar at the ears: I was the beard, and subtle as much as I could see it, and it was healthy for the crestians.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And there was a wound on his body, which he thought would kill him; and then after 30 days, if it had not changed its position, I opened the wound, sewn it up, and dressed it, and there was no sign of an infection.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	If a wound is on the thigh or back of a man, and it becomes infected, and the wound does not heal, and does not follow its natural dispositions, and does not find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if another man has a wound in his face, and it becomes infected, and he suffers great pain; and then after a while, other similar things happen.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I found a splinter in the side of the king's man, who had it stuck in his hand; it was a small one, located on the left side. It remained there for three days before I was called to treat it.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound that was tightly closed.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried to open it very gently, and I did not feel anything; but I felt a sharp and painful sensation in my left ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the splinter I had placed in my hand, because it did not burn; and I seemed to feel that it was the splinter.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I place the splint on the hand, and relieve the right-side wound, and wait for the surgeon to extend his hand long enough so that he can touch the elbow of his arm; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied the medicine to the corrosive wound on the hand, as it was overgrown, and touched it, and felt the elbow of the thumb that was bent towards the fingertip; then I closed the opening of the wound with this medicine, as the head of the thumb appeared visible to me; and it healed well in four months, and then I removed the stitches, and the sutures from both sides, and could not; therefore, I continued to refine and invent ways to strum the strings, as soon as I had well-made stitches, according to the form that will come at the end of this chapter, as I stretch it, and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it accordingly, and the wound was sore, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I said the quality of extracting some arrows, if you apply your cure to what I do not say, because the books cannot make everything appear perfectly; but the masters of the art make great things with few tools and the things that are present and lacking, they achieve nine works and nine instruments in the descent of the things drawn down this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not issue from the limbs or they are bitten for the following reasons: either by the leg or they enter, or in another way; and the one that is thrown from the arm or it enters, it is an arrow that has entered into the flesh, and it will never be thrown again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	If she does not jump now, if she lets it be entirely exposed and the wound is open, and she becomes fixed in the bone, and she cannot move if there are no other joints, and each joint is closed; then she jumps, and if she jumps, if she perceives through the wound at all points, as long as the wound is eslargied, and then the trai.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone and waits until one of the stomachs of the eye, and some of the accidents I have mentioned open for the patient: if not treat it, but leave it as long as it remains even after some joints, because if the arrow comes to syfac, it is the death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	When the bone is not broken only in the bone itself, and does not come out of its place, and no other accidents have happened to the patient, then the surgeon should intervene.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bone is already broken and cannot be set, then the surgeon should immediately provide first aid, as I have told you; then treat the patient until they are healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	If the bone is not visible in the limb, and the patient insists, then use any instrument you have; if you feel it, if there is no wound or injury, then treat the wound as much as possible; if the ear is large, and the ear is held by the bone, then cut or crush the ear of the limb as much as you can; but be careful not to cut the ear too much.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you do not once, if the child until it is read has been harmed, then tear it, for the extraction causes pain.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the dislocation of the shoulder is against what we have said in this chapter, then you misunderstand what we have said in this chapter; and you will be cut on the nerve and vein, and it will be sewn according to how you think you can remove the arrow without causing further harm, either quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently; and you will sew the skin according to how it was when the arrow was removed, because this is the largest help that can be given, and if you do not, if you do not, then follow what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The first line of the translation is: "The arrowhead that comes from another part, or it does not open anything of it, or the leather is bent in some place so that one can see or feel it differently: then pull it out, as much as the points can hold, and then extract it: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, if you turn your round hand around as much as possible when it enters the bone, and widens the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be drawn out, if you leave it alone, and then continue the extraction as much as possible when it is drawn out; and if it is the arrowhead and it is in the shaft, it is cut off at all ends; and if it is the tip of the arrowhead and it enters the hair of the instrument, and then it is cut off, and if the arrowhead is hair, it is cut off at the point entering the instrument for lighter extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrowhead is stuck, then it comes that you cover the entire wound or the venom is, and then you treat the wound as best as you can.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the shoulder, belly, or intestine, and it is protruding, and you cover it, and it holds; and then cover the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then clean the wound as best as you can; and treat until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tines used to extract arrows is similar to the beak of a hedgehog, and it looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are different types: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed hair is like the beak of a sparrow, to be inserted at the tip of the arrowhead, just as this is shaped:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the tines to be inserted and to be shaped is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Of the veins that are safe to cut, there are XXXI, of which XVI are the largest, which is to say: the two that are after the ears, which are called the "herb" arteries; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and the veins that are in the two lobes of the two eyes, which are called "aspirations"; and the vein that is cut in the front; and the vein that is cut at the top of the chin; and the guineas that are or col; and the veins that are in the lips of the mouth, which are called "augeherich" veins; and the veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	1. The veins that are commonly found in each arm are usually five: one is the cranial, which is on the left side of the costal, and it is called the "garden of the head" people; the other is called the fast, which is composed of the cranial and the basilar, and it is called the "garden of the chest"; and the basilar is if it is on the right costal, and it is called the "garden of the belly", and it is under the fascia, and it is the one that is found, which is open manifestly under the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	2. The saved vein is the one that is between the external and internal carotid arteries, and if it rains; and in the leg, there are three veins: one is the "garden of the gallbladder" which is on the left side of the costal, and the second one is the "gallbladder" which is at the ankle of the right costal; and the third one is called the "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other costal; and in the other leg, there are three veins like those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	1. The ear pains that follow the ears if aided by ancient cathaters and removers; and the quality of such healing, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the mouth of the patient, and wipe the ear with a rough cloth; then the patient's mouth is on a needle, as long as the ears appear behind the ears in the dependence of the chief: if you feel the pain in your own head, then it is good; then take the lancet, and cut through the vein just above the bone, then gently hold all the vein with both hands, and cover and the skin and the vein well enough to pass through, and make a sigh as you see; then tie and lie down, until it is healed as you see; then I have also said the incision and the cautery of the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	1. The health of the two arteries in the temples, if they are old, sore, and hardened, and have become accustomed to the watery humors; and if you judge it to be so, and the patient's pulse is weak, as the veins open widely; then you will feel the coldness of the hand, and then sign the index finger, and cut the lancet through, and lift the vein and the hand, as you have done in the other veins, and make the incision according to your necessity; then remove the reed, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton; and then form the wound, and leave it as long as it is sound; and we have spoken and of their extraction and of their removal, or at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The patient's face wound is as serious as the cranial wound, with ancient facial diseases, migraines, and bruising. If the physician suspects that the patient's collarbone is being pulled by the malaide as the wound opens, then they should take the instrument called the "fosseur", which looks like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then they should place the tip of the wound on the patient's hand or another part, and allow the blood to ooze out according to the amount you see; then they should cut the malaide's collarbone, and sew the wound as tightly as possible, never leaving an opening wider than a flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	All that is needed is for the flames to be just right; and the safe way, because it is close by, and by chance, the flames break when they are slightly touched.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The safety of the two veins that are in the linen sheets if they help, and the girdle, and the cut, and the orifice in the oil, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their safety if it is that the mallet twists the neck while twisting any line, as before; then the safe way, and so the safe way, a little long but wide flame a little large, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they are very sharp; then make quick bloodletting, as much as you can manage, and then tie the cloth, and hold it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	If the wound is clean and not too deep, and it is not gangrene, and not a disease of the face, as if it has bloody discharge, and becomes more painful with age; and the quality of the wound if the skin is tight around it, then tie the cloth around your left hand, and take a subtle flame and touch it to the corner of the lip that is between the two eyebrows, because the wound does not open very well, and it will now start to bleed; do not let it bleed too much, and make bloodletting according to your need, and then tie a cloth around it one night, because it will be quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The patient's health is aided in the relief of pain, and the onset of illness, and various diseases, and corrosions, and herpes, and empetigines; and the quality of the remedy if it is that the physician stretches his neck on both sides as we have said; and the physician being in the loyal service of the patient, and the patient sitting on the physician's knee, then cleanses the vein lengthwise widely, then draws out enough blood, as much as possible; then does another part in the other vein, then releases the line, and tightens and straightens the veins evenly so that the patient does not twist; and leaves it at morning, if the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the deer
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the lips of the deer is helped to close in the mouth, and to prevent corruption of the genitals, and cracks of the lips, and sores and burns.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit before you, and tighten his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the eyes, of which one is on the left side and the other on the right, and they are black due to their being dark, and because they have thin dark eyes: therefore, cut each one, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then cut the largest of each part, and all the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The health of the tongue is affected by the health of the veins; if aid is given after the health of the head, and it is due to a sore throat, and diseases of the eyes, and diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the tongue is better when the patient's hands are in front of the sun and wets the tongue and looks at each side with a black vein: therefore both, and not too much, because these are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The commonly affected veins are healthy in two ways: either by pressing on the entire flame with wide hands, or by using a fine olive oil as you would when trimming, and they are called "anesil"; and they are wide and fine according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the fire cautery is such that it is called a sword, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	It has the skill to open the veins with flat hair-like stones that contain large clots and troubles; and this is the form of the fire cautery made of olive wood.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	It is more delicate to apply, and it is safer for the veins that are delicate, or if there is delicate clotted blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The salvation of the basilisk, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are caused by swelling of the throat, neck, belly, and other parts; and it is necessary for the healer to save wisely and avoid the artery that is swollen.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	If it pricks the artery, and blood comes out, then it must be stopped if possible; as I have said; and it should not be pinched by the fire, but cut if necessary.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the basculation does not open clearly, and you must pull it, and change another one; or you do not want any rain in it, or you want to draw out the vein from the arm: it opens clearly; and the fire is applied to the flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	If you see the vein of the healthy arm, and you must pull the arm, and touch the vein as far as you can see the pulse; then sign the vein is inflamed, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with the fire at the flame; and watch that you do not hurt the artery when you see the vein swell, because it is the artery: therefore shut it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If you see flowing upwards like the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, it is not from the artery: hurry to, and put your hand on it for a long time, then observe if it does not move; hold the shoulder with both hands, let it go, and do not move the member; and be careful, and do not move it until it is safe.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	2. And if it does not become inflamed, and it hurts, and the physician is not present, then if the artery has opened, because the head of the member has retreated; subside it.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	1. Take a scalpel from the fistula, and sharpen it, and take one of the halves and tie it well to the other; if it is not slippery, it is good; if not, then the treatment, as we have said, of the powders that make it slippery; the bindings are not easily moved in other positions for the small wound of the injury, and the pain of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	2. The health of the vein is improved if it is treated with the ointment that makes it slippery, and the pain of the chest, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the patient to rest the nerve that is in pain, and if it does not become too tight, and it relaxes the nerve, and it becomes gripped and healthy, and by chance it cannot be cured; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open any holes for its subtlety, then it is necessary that you heal the instrument's wound; and hide the nerve from your sight.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is blood between the two veins, if they are long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment of the head if it helps, that it attracts blood to the head and helps the wound; and it is better to help by touching with olive oil or sweet oil, because it is the most safe of all veins, because it does not harm the nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Indeed, it is better to touch it more lightly, and do not hurt the first time, and continue; and by chance, it inflames the wound in some men, but it does not hurt the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about health is that it is to maintain good health and avoid diseases coming; and it should be made in one of the three veins: that is, the head, fast, and basilic; and it should be done at the beginning of each prayer, and during and after meals, when the sign of repletion appears; and it should be done the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The health that is maintained with diseases has no determination, but that when fasting it is of a day or night, in all hours and at any time; and it does not matter if the children are under 14 years old, or women who can only bear children after four months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. Try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When the patient is feeling better, if he has defecated, if he has not retained any feces, if the intestines are not superfluous and harmful to the members; nor if he is too fat or drunk, even if he has eaten too much, or been drugged; and if he becomes sicker after colic pain, vomiting, and abdominal discomfort, and many women give birth, and many women have labor pains, and many women have to urinate, and many women have to relieve themselves, and this is true for both men and women, and regardless of whether it is due to the arm or the chest; then subtly the humors are reduced, if he is not too large, by food and drinks and medicines, if you can afford it; then take a bath, nothing should displease you, to reduce the sweat, and make yourself healthy from the inside out, and through the third day, as we have said; and keep away from work, rest, luxury, and such things; and be modest and chaste, and be healthier than you are now, and rub your arms twice or three times with oil, then gently pull on the limb as much as it is tight or loose; and then rub the hands with oil, as long as the limbs are hot, and feel them; then dry the patient with a little oil, then put his hand in his left hand on the place where the wound was, if the wound is not healed, and it does not hurt, then dip his hand in oil, and press it on the wound as much as it hurts the limb; and if the wound is healed, do not touch it with your hand.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that run like cords to the healthier parts, and if they are many, then when one is placed on the fire, it retreats from the fire, and cannot open the vein, and then it is one of those; and if the vein is closed, it is the wound too tight, for then it comes to the healthier parts, and the healthier parts must be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, then it continues a little less of that part or suddenly, and if it does not open, it means it is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	1. If the patient reads it and becomes weak, and the physician spreads it, let him leave it for one or two hours, and do not tie the arm: by chance, apostles come; nor enter the bath, then resume the cure as it pleases; and if the wound is small, or the flesh subtly cut and you doubt that it does not have much blood as you see, because it seems too little in that wound for all the fire's heat; and the work is done quickly, otherwise that the patient reads it becomes weak; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	2. If you see the shoulder swell, if you do not resume the cure, and put a little oil on it, because it softens the chest of the blood, and dries the swelling in this shoulder that the oil lies on; and then apply oil to each wound that you heal the veins, to stop the course of the blood; and this itself causes triage and bowels of dust when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	1. If several abscesses occur repeatedly, once it is healthy and the vein opening is small, if you hurry, and soak a soft sponge in cool water and wring it out, and stretch it for an hour; and it is necessary to do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if there is no black or green matter at the site of the vein after several days, if you don't know; and if you see, put nothing of aloe or remedy in water of calamine, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	2. Many times abscesses and inflammation occur at the health of the church: therefore put your hand there, and if that appearance is painful, compress the hand with the leu.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient should not place anything else on the body as we have said, for fear of cutting the artery; but I applied a dry cloth to endure the pain, then another treatment, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its quantity and color of the serum.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it drain as long as it is red; and if you see a large amount, let it drain as much as it becomes thin; and if it is too cold, let it be cooled down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is good for those who are in pain and in distress, who have skill in extracting blood, to make a larger wound, with wide-open flames; and for the weak, do the opposite, and they become healthier often, and they should be treated healthier by cutting across, not pinching; and this way of healing is saved from the decay of blood and the increase of nerve pain, and it is worth while that the healthier wound is not too large.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	For the one who needs to be made healthy, it is necessary to give him thin bread in the juice of green pomegranates; if he is drunk, three times or four. And if he has a cold complexion, before the thin bread in honey or honey aromatic with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and good-smelling honey.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he feels dizzy after drinking the juice of green pomegranates, after the purge of blood, if it is necessary to make him sweat with charcoal and a scented subtle honey, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter of sincope for the evacuation of venereal matter.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If he sees his arm swelling and getting larger, and it happens again, if he is able, when he is weak from lack of strength, he becomes healthier and healthier, according to the amount of his virtue that continues to increase.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If he sees his arm swelling and getting larger after the first time he was strong, and he becomes weak, if he is healthy seven hours after the first time he was strong, or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	If he becomes healthier from another perspective, if he must become healthier the day after or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For he has a fever that has been exacerbated by the cold and the wound, and if it comes to bringing down a large amount of fever, and opening the chest as much as possible; then when you reward all the conditions of health, and put your hand on the pulse as soon as it becomes healthy, so that the death does not come from the chest, and this happens many times when the patient is neglectful; and it does not matter if you see the arm swelling and letting out blood for the second time, and the wound is closed, so that you form around it; but if it is frozen, let it remain as long as it is healthy the second time; or if you do not reach the tip of the flame, until the cold that has frozen the chest is melted and the water that was in it is returned to its original state, and press gently on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, if it is left without being pressed and until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw the blood twice, if the vein is in the same arm or in another arm, or in another arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy because it is located near the shoulder because it is composed of.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the vein is healthy if the patient bleeds in hot water, as long as the flesh is red; then it should be tied tightly, if the vein appears well, then the blood now flows through it, not too wide or too long; and the wound should be large, and the hand should be near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be stopped, it should be re-inserted in hot water, and allow the blood to flow in cold water until you have enough; and if this is the case, do not reinsert the hand in hot water, because it will be more likely to heal than in this way; and the vein from this wound is safer than all other veins, because it has not been cut or bruised.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The first sentence to translate: "If the hand of the saved is worth all diseases of the left arm, and this is how it is done: tightly wrap the hand, and heat with hot water, as long as the vein is cold, if you can; and if it is not, and you cut through it all at once, if it does not hurt anywhere; and do not apply too much heat, because the skin is bare of flesh and cartilage, and then put the hand in hot water, if it does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated as much blood as is your skill, if you put on the vein oil and seal with a needle, and then make a hole in each rain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The patient's hand is affected if it is infected with the mouse disease, and I do everything as I have said to the left.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The health of the spleen is affected if it is affected by all diseases that are weakened by the heart, such as gallbladder diseases, retention of flowers, and kidney disease, and old leg diseases, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of one's health if it is that the diseases are biting in a feverish cold, and wipe the vein as soon as it bleeds, and pull out the joint at the piercing; and the vein if it is at the ankle, and through the piercing to the rain of the leg; then the rain is healthy or larger, or at the ankle, which is good.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you have clean hands when you are called to the sick one, if you find nerves that are dry and the sick person is in pain, and the flames are burning.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if you cannot find any, then put the patient in the cold bath and let the vein be well drained.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if you cleanse the first time, and the second time it recurs in a short time because the salted water is not enough; do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and then make a solution of the other hand equally well.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The salve for the sciatica is at the ankle of the foot, and its effectiveness is at the pain of the hip, when it is due to a blockage.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its health if it is that the patient has been in water or bathing, and draws the ankle IV times while twisting, because otherwise it will not open the vein; and if it opens, then the healthy in all ways that you can, and across; and it is best to cover it, because the wound is safe and it is ready for the hands of men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not cover it, then the healthy no amount of blood that has opened or does not have a small diuretic, and towards the little door, and make many incisions; and make as much blood as you see, and then let go of the limb, and put on cotton and draw it; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	The first sentence to translate is "des sainies de ventouse". The
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or iron, or silver; and ventilation can be done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing out blood, or by cutting without drawing out blood.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventilation, which is by cutting is done in two ways: either it is all on fire, or on fire; and ventilation which is made by cutting and drawing out blood is made in twelve degrees of the corps, with the head at the top, and the other parts in order; and the others are at the coste; and the others at the two espaules; and the ventilations are at the crupies; and the ventilations of the arms; and the ventilations of the legs; and the ventilations of the feet; and the ventilations are not for blood, but for small wounds that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not cause much pain, as we do with a wound of the flesh; and it is only necessary that it be kept clean, and at all on fire or on fire, without any disease that comes from repletion, as long as the corps has blood.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	1. If necessary for diseases, or due to habits, if the patient feels unwell at the beginning of each month, or at the end, and also in every ten days; because there are those who, when they have to cough, have a heavy chest; and if such people have fullness and redness in their face, and in their chest, and at the collarbone, and have a cold as well; and those who have a chill in their stomach, and lose their tongue, and spit out sputum; and if it is those who cough with pain, and see only sputum, and bleeding, and death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and at the same time when it is three hours after noon, we command our patients to rest.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The health of the head is helped by the cold wash, which comes with the hair, and it is only necessary after the evacuation of all the body's blood; and this rest is for the relief of the headache, and it is only necessary for those who are of a cold complexion or have a fever, because this does great harm; and therefore it is only necessary that the watchmen use it, and those who have cold diseases in the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often recover, soon become incapacitated, and therefore it is necessary to put the ventouse a little further down due to the fear of obstruction.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventouse in the neck is located between the healthy shoulder and the basilic vein, and therefore it is used for the esteresis of the pis, and for the fencing of the urethra, and for all, and for repletion; and it should be slightly tightened, because if it is too tight, it can cause obstruction or stomach or liver.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventouse in the neck is located near the collarbone and can cause pain in the shoulder, and it can also cause migraine and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is between the healthy basilic vein; and it is necessary to command the patient to hold his hand when putting it on, that he does not hit the artery, and it does not cause dislocations.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The windings of the throat are often a sign of disease of the mouth, and corruption of the genitals, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is found in the saliva of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders indicate a disease that comes from chill and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windings of the elbows indicate as much pain as those of the three forearms, because they attract blood from these large forearms; and commands the patient not to bear too much weight on it, because it is not strong enough and has few nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The first line of the text translates to: "The vacuum that is used on the chest if it is not done with great care can cause serious injuries and diseases, and it must be large and rounded so that it has the ability to properly draw; and by chance, if it is too delicate, it can break; and it causes great pain.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The second line of the text translates to: "The vacuums for the legs are healthy when they open wide because they draw blood from all parts of the body, and relieve old pain from rains, and menstruation, and bladder problems, and pull on the thighs; and they are in the area of the second toe and second finger, and they cause the body to become weak after long use, and bring pain in many positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	1. The manner to insert the cautery is if you put it in first time empty, and then fill it, stir it evenly, and continue doing this until you see the red and swollen part of the lip, and open the wound; then clean it, and replace the cautery, and prepare the position of the corsets, as some have very sharp, and cold pricks: if it is to hurt once only, and to make large wounds, and a little bleeding; and then lightly squeeze.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is not big, if it is to hurt twice: the first time by making the wound of the red and swollen part of the lip smaller.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is not healed the third time, then we must treat it with little blood; and when we only need to do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we are asked for blood, and often return; and if it is not healed quickly, and if the wound is deep and painful, and suitable for those with hard skin and strong bones, and who have had operations, then you should apply ointments made from the following oils: if it is in this case, violet oil, or honey-scented almond oil, or sesame seed oil; and if it is in wax, violet wax, or honeycomb wax, or chamomile wax, or another similar substance.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, then take warm oil, or balsam, or anointing oil, and apply them.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is healthy and large pores, it is not recommended to put oil on it, but it should be washed after the opening of the rose, or the cold, or the mushroom, or the cucumber, or the porcelain, or another similarity.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have sweat, if they rise from the pillow, or the rose of myrrh, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those who have excessive superfluities rise from wine vies, or from ague of sweat, or from decoction of anet or camomile, or from other similar causes; and they are not healthier before the bath than after, but rather an hour or two after. And they do not sleep before ventilation, and they must wake up when it is time to ventilate, and when they are ventilating.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And when those who are healthy become ill, and the sick are too hot and inflamed; if they need to drink cold things, like pomes grenates and endives and laitues at the island, and similar things; and they must take pucins, and char of chastron, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	1. The forceps that are placed to cause pain are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the stomach and bowels and intestines and liver, because this member does not suffer from external injury, and it only causes pain when it attracts blood to the member from one part to another, just as we put forceps on the breasts when it is not sick; to remove viscosity in the member, just as we put forceps on the stomach and bowels to alleviate the member; and to relieve pain when it is inflamed or pierced, if it is attracted by inflammation or if the piercing has been removed from its place, and these forceps are administered empty to suck only; and none of them are ever administered with fire, and no plasters of grout are ever applied, as in diseases that cause pain, and in this way we fill the forceps with hot water, or with water that has been heated with herbs that are beneficial to the member.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the fire cautery administered is:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two palm-wide and half a palm in width, and has a small pertussis on one side, like a needle, and is of iron or steel, so that it does not pierce the patient's skin; and in the middle, there is a wire of iron or steel, to insert a cord, and in this there are large and small loops according to the diseases and weight of those who take them, because the cautery of children are different from those of adults, and the thin ones are different from the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	1. And it must be put on the wound above the member: take the candle or liniment, and put it at the end of the wound where the wound is, so that it does not burn the patient; then put it on the member, and you must put it on the sutures that we have said, if you see, if there is vapor coming out, and then remove the wound; and take the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you can.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	1. In the wound that is in a patient with a cold, there is no gauze or pustules, and it is not infected unless it is only when it is clear of fever, and it is placed on the member only then; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	1. Withouts are not taken except in parts where it is possible to put splints due to their small size, like the lips and genitals, and similar parts; and in these parts, if they are naked of char, like doves or needles, and other similar parts; and the quality of the user is that when you find withouts which are in soft waters, if you take them; you put a nut in soft water, as long as they are free of any children, and have no vomiting; then it is healthy for the vein and the wound, then wash the member as much as it is red, and put on the withouts; and when they are smooth, and cherish, if it is the lower part or the upper, if it can be put on with a ventouse, then it is good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If the wound is not clean, then lift the limb, and then the swelling; and if the patient's arm is too tight after the wound, then use a cold flax bandage, and apply it as long as the swelling remains; and if the swelling increases, then use a mixture of vinegar or galls, and similar things, until it is reduced; or you can use half a dozen peeled onions and leave them on the limb as long as they burn, so that it will now be anesthetized; and if you have more wounds, then use other onions.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not take on the salve, then cleanse the lesion with fresh salve or thread as much as it will hold, and then insert them, and as they feel the salve, if they burn; and when you see that they are healing, apply a little aloe and linen, or smoke, if they now cherish.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they are the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Explain to me, what the folk say of this book, that they have never seen any of the ancient books, nor any letters; and for this reason, the science has been neglected in our land, because I have never found any boast; and I do not know if there is any, except that through the science of the old books, or because I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described in this book what is contained in it, and I have summarized at the end, and I have clearly shown the shapes of the fractures that have been broken, as I have done in these two books before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say at the beginning of this book the sum of the words and chapters or sentences where one's understanding meets, and more so if those who have experienced it understand and learn this noble art, and learn to teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture, dislocation, or twist, or tortuousness occurs in no part of the body, if nothing can be done to help the patient on one side and the other, whether it is due to weakness, or young age, or feebleness; or if the patient is not very thin, or too fat; and if the patient is too thin, that means cold joints, and thin bones, and does not drink any wine, nor eat thin grasses, and does not fill the veins with blood, until there is no doubt of apoplexy, or expansion of matter in the member; if the patient recovers after the first government used by him.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to remove the patient's flesh that causes great swelling, or if there is viscosity, like dough when cooked in boiling water, and testes, and pies, and pancakes of wool, and cheese, and fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the more the swelling is reduced, the fracture heals faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And you advise that broken bones and deformities cannot be well repaired or corrected according to their nature by the hands of the members, nor as those that are too flexible; but if it is possible, reset the broken bone with large tendons that are sutured and joined together as much as possible, just as it was before; and do not cut it off completely, and for this reason it is necessary to remove large amounts of flesh, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that fractures come in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the skull is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will tell you all the kinds of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another that breaks when struck, like the size of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a small notch.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each fracture has its own way and tool in restoration, according to what remembrance comes to the patient's mind; and the fracture of the bone is by what part it appears to be torn, and open well by defense, and some pressure of the hand; and if it is not tortuosity, and pain is not felt in the wound, and there is no fracture, then there is no tortuosity, or notch, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you can only manage to move it with your hand, but take the medicine that comes afterward, and then try again gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And you should be concerned about the fracture that will occur in the bone, and the two parts that are separated. Now you should aim to put them back in place as evenly as possible, without causing further pain; if the pain subsides, then leave it alone until the swelling is reduced. Then gently and carefully put it back in place, and be assured that the restoration of this bone will be lighter than the restorations of other bones with pieces missing. Then try again gently.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	1. And if there are broken pieces in the bone of the foot, if they are two parts, it is hands or fingers, or a part of your finger, or a cord, or a cord and your hand; and place the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are adjusted, if you reset by your effort the additions in their place in the muscle that you see, and keep that by your effort does not cause the surgeon's injury or pain; and adjust well the two ends of the bone in the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	2. And if it seems to you that it is not well, if it curves beautifully and does not strain too much, do not press as those who come by their own effort cause the member to contract and draw tight, as we have often wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	When the member is painful, if the patient carefully instructs the shoulder not to move at all, neither by day nor by night, neither by turning nor in any other way; and it is well that the member feels secure so that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it does not feel any pain, if it is not dislocated, and it is necessary to put it in proper position so that it does not feel any pain; and you keep it steady until it is restored, and the quality of the broken member is according to what I am saying.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	It is said that the broken member has different sizes in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	1. For it has bitten off limbs, just as if they were wheat and straw: if it comes to wrapping them in linen cloths and bandages; and the large ones, like sticks and stems: if it comes to wrapping them in a wide and hard piece of linen, for the large limbs embrace all the great member, and draw it evenly, so that there is no part left untied, then the small pieces are lightly tied with three or four turns around the member, and the hand is tightly tied to each part of the limb, then go to the end of the fracture and tighten it less than the fracture allows, until the fracture is sufficiently softened to a great part of the healthy part, then take another piece of linen and turn it back on the other side of the fracture, then return to the part opposite the fracture, and tighten it gently, not too tight nor too loose, as we have said in the first part of the fracture; then put between the wrapped limbs of linen or bandages, as they are equal, and then put all of them on, and then put your well-made ties on, if it has not caused an apoplexy or hematoma.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if it is inflamed or gangrenous, then put on something soothing for gangrene, which helps to reduce inflammation and leave no marks; then tightly tie your eyes, and they should be of a width equal to one wide, well-shaped catchet, or of rings made from palm fronds, or of bands of palm leaves, and they should be in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the one you put on the wound be larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as the member is small or large; then tie the eyes in the same way as before, then put a thread around it, as was done in the first loop; the more it is stretched, the less; and the thread must be even, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be of linen; for if the thread is too thick, like the works of fools who make their laces with linen threads, it is a great error, for the loop cannot be even if it is too fine, and it only serves to make each eye smaller and less spaced.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is dislocated by the shoulders after the stripping of the arms in healthy ones, then they must put on the threads of linen or silk, if it does not bend.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splint, and the edge is broken, I will tell you the treatment for this afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And it is said that it is not easy to straighten all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not easy to straighten them on the first day; and according to your skill in amputation, after five or seven days, or more, depending on the severity of the injury; and the old way of restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsion: and that you take flour that is between the bolts of the mill, and knead it with a great deal of yeast, and make this dough, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of restoring fractures in other positions, as well as for women and children, because it is not too hard or too soft.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	1. Another way to mend breaks and dislocations and twists: take barley, lard, and umber, and Arabic gum and mugate, in the ratio of X to V; aloes and VIIII, and made into powder, and mixed with wool of ox dung; if the complexion of the face is hot, it can be used as this plaster, because it has a good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	1. Another way to mend twists: take Arabic gum and vinegar, in the ratio of X to VIIII; aloes and VI, and arsenic, and mix well, and cook with water or ox dung, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other ways to make a plaster for joints and bones, and alleviate the pain coming, and the size uses of the bone, and the fracture: take new flour, and the dough melted with oil and cooked, and put on the leg.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Other plasters do not cure, but they are useful for alleviating post-operative pain and proper bone pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Other ways to make a plaster that cures broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth pottery and boil together, and make the plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Other ways to make a plaster for bone fracture repair and to relieve post-operative pain.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	The root of vismvle, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of wheat, of each a part; and boil, and conserve with wine, and the members are soaked, and it is conserved with fresh coriander water, or with water, and it is used.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to apply more force than the first, when the abscess is deeply located, comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Boil the roots of vismvle, and linseed meal, balsam, honey, and salt, and violet and chamomile flowers, of each a part; and boil, and conserve with fresh salty water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the choler of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that no one puts on the broken limb to restore it as if it were made of wax and oil, and nothing more, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems that Galen says that things like hot wax and oils, such as myrrh and frankincense, and similar things, should be used to restore the broken limb, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat wounds and pain: take a piece of cloth and thread it with the hairs of an ox or the feathers of a goose, or silk, and sew, and stitch, and apply it to the wound, and then cover it with a piece of cloth.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the wound gradually heals, and the patient feels no pain in the bone of the limb; if it does not heal by hand pressure, and pain or pruritus comes to the bone, if you haste, and remove it, and now apply the plaster; then gently drape, and wet the sea sponge, and dip in cold water, and raise the limb as much as the pruritus ceases and the pain subsides; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry cloth, moisten with cold or rose oil, and tie with a bandage, as long as you are sure not to have post-operative shock; and allow the inflammation in the member to subside, and the pain to subside, then resume gentle application of the plaster, a little emplaustre, and do not strain it too much; and gradually as it heals.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is painful and inflamed and swollen, and it recurs, as you have done previously, if you follow the treatment.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if you do not see any sign of improvement within three days or four or seven, and never more than twenty days, as soon as the wound begins to heal and approaches the bone, then increase the restraint more than before, and the flesh will grow larger, just as I have said before; and if you see the skin becoming drier than it should be, apply warm poultices every time you remove the bandage, and once a day, and cut off the norrissemens at the joint; in this way you will cure the norrissemens at the joint, and stop the inflammation that causes the limb to ache: this is harmful, and if it does not improve within a week, I know of no other remedy than to apply ointment and keep the bandage on straight.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various kinds of wounds
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of wounds, and various forms, and the causes are assigned; for there are wounds made by the blow of a spear, and the whole bone is cut off that is the bone, if it is broken like a knife or a fork; and therefore this kind of wound is called "cut" or "hack".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	The spear cuts the bone by one sense of feeling and is called this kind of wound "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is a blow that is embedded, or a cut or a cut of the bone, or a piercing under the bone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a persistent fracture, which approaches the tissue that is loose from the bone, or it is against the bone, and this wound or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	If there is a healed wound that is as subtle as a cut, and it is a small fracture, and for this it is called the "capillary" fracture; and if the wound is made by hurting with a pierce, or with a nail, or with something else, and it lets the piece of the bone enter, and it is the same size as when they healed the burns; if it enters through the piercing.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	When the bones are wet, such as in the case of children, and they break in various ways, those that are lighter are more broken than others; and I will speak about this in their language.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of fractures by the force that causes them, and by the tests they have undergone, and by the corrupted cartilage that is present.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The visible appearance is known by the fact that when the bone is discovered and the edges are rubbed, if the dark fracture is not open, it is not considered a true fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, be careful with the patient's condition, and if you see no serious accidents, such as vomiting, understanding, extension, and swelling, fever, and the wounds turning red and becoming more inflamed, and other similar signs that cannot be cured with doubt, then you must consider it a true fracture.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see an unexpected accident, and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the first bone comes to you, and it is in the hand, then it is necessary to cut the bone before the fourth year of life.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is in this way, then if you cut the bone before the ninth year of life, then the bone will not be cut correctly, and the accident that we have mentioned will come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	If the bone fracture comes near the edge of the bone, then if you cut the bone in this way, then you should cut off the broken part: and it is that you pull the head of the new bone, and cut through the bone in all the ways that you can, and cut the shape of the wound as large as you can, and it comes to reveal the bone, or the bone is broken, and if it helps to do this, and it is that you fill the joint with smooth oily powder; and then rest the wound until the broken bone is calmed and secured against displacement; then begin to cut the bone, and it is done according to two ways of carving: one way is that you cut at the narrowed end, and it is in this form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I cut another one that is larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is if you have many different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp, and they are made of iron; and you work them lightly so as not to cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and brittle, it comes to pass that you perforate it, otherwise you should maintain the size with needles, and do not make them too large or too small, so that they do not pass over the bone; and you must have more, so that each one fits well in its joint of the bone, if you have needles for each test; and this is the form of the three ways of needles:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	1. The quality to perceive through the broken bone is that you place ice on the bone, and turn it around until you feel that the bone is perceived; then put the ice back another part a little later, and then do everything, then cut the incisions in the bone that is between the points, and do it as subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, as you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the trumpets that you have like needles, pincers; and make sure you do not touch the scalp or the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perceived and treated the bone, if it covers that the tool that is made of the bone is made to another instrument resembling an incision, but it should be more narrow and subtle than the other incision; and if it does not make any small bones, nor any scales, if the light bones are gently in the trumpets; then cure the wound with tentions and dressings that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of opening is when it is done by the Gaulish method, which is more skilled; and the large incision, and that is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, where the open fracture is visible, so that once you have removed this part, you can measure from the top of this incision, and its form will be:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut too much, and the part that is cut is towards the bone; then firmly hold a small tool, so that you lightly touch the entire bone, and be well prepared for the cloth that is on it; if it is near the bone, if the bone is light, because it is easy to handle, and causes pain.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce the skin, and the bone is only covered by soft tissue, and it has small pieces, then cover those sharp edges with something, and smooth out the scales with a subtle rasp, as you must have various quantities of it to serve each limb according to the type and appearance of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use a coarse rasp first, and then a softer one, and continue to do this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In every other hair removal and fine fracture, you must serve according to its address; and this is something that cannot be repeated for the one who has studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	1. If the wound is discovered, it comes to pass that you should first apply linen to the wound, according to the size of the wound, and grease it with olive oil, and place it over the wound; then take another doubling of linen, either II or III, and grease it with wine and olive oil, and place it over the first linen; and do this more gently than you would, so that you do not burn the smoke, then dress with other linen, and do not strain it too much, only as much as it covers the wound, and leave it for I jor or II, until the inflammation is calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines as follows: roots of lis, flour of times, powder of incense, aristolochum, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it over the wound, and administer further medicines without burning; and be sure that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any ointment or bandage on it, for if a bandage is placed on the bare skin, it can cause great harm to the patient, as it can irritate the skin and cause pain. For if you apply something greasy to the wound, it will cause pain to the patient.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	1. Prepare well, as there is no need for accidents to happen to the patient, just as we have said, if it is doubtful, then so be it.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if nothing comes out but the medicine we have put in, then part of honey and three parts of rose oil and one part of glue, and let it be applied to the face; then the cure is done in ways that suit the patient's condition, as long as they are healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	3. It is said that the two parts of bone and joint are never broken, or only one, because they are two bones; and this is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is twisted or bent, and then it becomes healthy.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	If one of the two parts is broken, then if you can reach your small toe or finger tip, and make the break even with your index finger, and in the pocket as long as it does not deviate from its natural figure; and do this lightly, and tell the patient that the helper does not feel pain through their shoulder.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the break is in the part of the finger, and cannot reach the shoulder, then if you can put it even at the head of a large pocket,
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If the break is in the other part, then if you redo it and wait to restore the first joint, if possible; otherwise, after the ninth or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then reach for the tip of the finger with your thumb, if the break is in a part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	1. If you cut at another part, it will be; and the wounds should be so large that they fill the cavities with blood.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	2. And no restorer will say that you must smooth the wounds in the burr, and each day will die.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	3. It seems to me that it is only right, but the wounds should be smoothed in the making of a bun of horse dung and powdered milled flint; then leave the wound, as long as the bone is firm, and the cartilages harden.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	4. And never cut on the neck of the wound, and if it is too loose, and holds the breastplate, and blows the salves among; or do as you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess ruptures, come to the physician as soon as you can, for it may be that he puts on a piece of cloth or a piece of silk dipped in rose oil, or in a drop of vinegar.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess does not come, then put on ointment made of flour and powdered incense, mixed with eggs, and then put on light bandages, and do not close the wound; and if the wound in the nose is small, and it is torn into small pieces, then if there are suitable stitches available for this, then sew them, and treat the scar as best as possible, and make it look like the rest of the skin; and if there is no plague on the wound, then treat it with poultices and bandages, and put on charred twigs, until it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the dislocation of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is dislocated, there is no wound, and the fracture is slight only, and not broken into pieces, but rather cracked like a shell, if you understand, lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the left part, to place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, then place your index finger on the right hand, lightly touch the fracture, and feel for the other hand, and hold it steady.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the lower jaw is divided into two parts, then it comes to administer an extension of two parts, as long as it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth move or fracture, or if they are pulled by a gold or silver or silk thread, then place them on the broken lower jawbone, and place one double drapery; and place one double stitch well made, or a piece of leather even, long and wide according to the size of the jawbone, and tie it to the cheek that you use, and command the patient to lie down, and give light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	1. If you see that the joint changes shape, if it is left to itself, and then reset to its original position; and apply a plaster with flour from the miller's mill, or wheat flour, after you have washed the skin; and apply a light plaster, and let it dry, and the joint's shape does not change, leave it as it is, until it is healthy; it becomes healthy many times in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	2. And if the plaster comes off, if you do not follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	3. And if there is a fracture and wound together, remove a small piece of bone from the joint; if the bone has flexible bones, it can be bent.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is wide, let it be cleaned according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have all these pieces, and there is no need for anything else, if the wound is wide, make sure it is clean, and then insert some adhesive bandages to support the plaster, until it is healthy.
de la forcele	of its strength.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks more often in front of the shoulder, towards the elbow, and the break is in three ways: it is broken and separated into two, with two pieces, and it is lighter to restore; or it is broken with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	1. And the operation is done when the fracture is sensed as a wound, if you have two assistants, that one of them examines the helper who feels the force of the fracture; and the other extends the collar towards the part, then place the fracture equally in your two hands, if it forms as it should, and there should be no appearance or change.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	2. And if you are more skilled at extending, if you put the shoulder blade against the patient's back, with a round or oval bead of linen or wool, according to your need; and you make it lighter and draw the bead to your hand, so that you place the fracture equally in both hands, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you do not treat the head of the strong force immediately, because it comes from afar, then the patient's pain will increase, and they should loosen the shoulder and earlobe, and pull the muscles of the shoulder away, as long as the bone of the strong force is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture to your two sides, and if you cannot hold the fragments together, then cut them loose; and take out the lighter pieces, and if the bone does not join by any means to any part of the incision that you made, but put the strong force instrument away for safety:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	The text seems to describe a situation where a spoon appears, is not very sharp, and should be as wide as the limb desires, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the will; if there are two heads, as you see, and some are wide, and others are thin, as the swelling of the wound you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of a cut, if the wound is large, or if it is small, if you doubt a cut, then use dressings of linen and bandages, according to their quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if you cut yourself, if it is large, then use oil of rose and essence and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	1. The healing of the bone, when it feels pain and discomfort, is to put the powdered sulfur and wool of urine on the bone, and lightly sprinkle some salt on it, and then place a small thick branch of palm leaves, and gently wrap around the bones; then take a fine wire of three to four inches long and long, and wrap it around the branch, and tie it; then take a subtle wire of three to four inches long and long, and wrap it around the branch, and make sure the bend of the branch is tight; then place the wire under the bend, so that the end of the bend is tight; and place the wire on the brace, and turn the bend under the collar, and loosen the saddle; and pull out the wire from each part, and when you see that the brace holds the brace firmly, and you see clearly that the wire does not move away from the bone breakage, each reward a certain amount, and when the mallet is loose, and if the mallet is tight; and make the mallet on its back, and put it when it falls a small pillow of the saddle, for raising the mallet to the top; if you can straighten the bone breakage by straightening the shoulder or by pulling the arm to the collar, and if it does not slip accidentally, in about twenty days; then resume the wrapping, if you see that it is suitable, and hold and release it as soon as it is restored; and it is restored in about twenty-eight days, and less in no man.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the injury to the elbow
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the elbow breaks or widens due to impact, and it does not return to its original shape, and if the aponeurosis follows the shape of the fracture, and resets according to its natural form, in all possible ways you can; then powder the elbow with flour mixed with a lot of urine, and light sprays, and put on a large and thin sheet, a little wider than the elbow, and make sure it is well fixed on the elbow bone, if you use linen threads for it; then tighten the bandage as tightly as possible so that the sheet does not move from its place, and watch the line each time it loosens, and whenever it relaxes, and put the sheet back in its place when it is free from the elbow, and the elbow will be recovered in 20 or 25 days; when these numbers are completed, if it does not heal, and you are sure, because this is only what needs to be done lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone comes forward, and it is not properly aligned, then they are made to fit, and the bone, and we make what we have said in breaking the force of the healing of the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is never broken in its environment, but this sometimes happens; but it often breaks in the defense.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the field, if it is not aligned properly, and great pain is felt, and lack of strength, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and the wounds are opened in the broken bones, and it feels well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the dislocation is on the shoulder and the patient cannot move it, place a bandage between the spines, press the spines, assemble the costal cartilages at your hands, subtly put them equal to all ways you can until the bone looks as it should; then put on plasters and poultices of salt or another light substance, wrap it in a cloth, and tie it around the broken bone so it doesn't move; and turn the ligament back on itself, tighten it gradually, and reward each hour if it holds, and if it loosens, if it's due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the shoulder, or pain or apoplexy, if you haste, and it slips, and remove the bandage, and address what came from the ways of cures; then rebandage it, and tighten it as much as it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breast wound
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	That the breast wound only comes from great blows after the back, and at the head's end, and does not pain much in the investigation as it should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you can straighten the fracture as it should be done.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then place the splint, and tighten it with a screw, if you are skilled at it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is leaning towards the spine, it causes great pain and tension, like tears; and it often vomit blood, and that is a sign of serious illness, and the ancients have put a large amount of medicine.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say it is necessary to administer foods that inflame the belly, by pinning the bracelet to the chest.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, if it is not for the sake of life, if it does not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, if it is good.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And none of them would think to put vinegar on the leg, for it is sweet, and that seems right; however, doubt and say that the vinegar does not attract excess moisture to the leg because of its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And none of them would think to cover the leg with oily powder and put tenths between the ribs to measure equal to the length of the limb, then treat the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure from the bone that pierces the flesh, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut through the shoulder blade that is broken, and put in an instrument to hold the face; and then the bone must be trenched, and made light, and then the edges of the wound are sewn if they are large, and the cure is done with stitches as long as it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess comes, then put on oiled cloths moistened with rose oil on the wound; and cure while the leeway is needed for the abscess to come out, and it must be gently pressed on the side of the chest where it needs to be, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	Of the break of the shoulder
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a breaking of the shoulder bone, and soon it pains; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	When there is no pain, and you see that it will be healthy or not, if you see your hands soft and swollen and lifeless, and cannot move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Beware of those who are mortally injured in many ways, and if they are silent and feel well when pulled and held, beware that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if we put it in care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if such a thing comes to the back of the spine, and you see that it is healthy or not, if you see your fingers soft, and the accidents that are in the hands, and when the back jumps and there is ventrite and egestion with will; and when it is hung up in the belly, if there is jump and ventrite.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he feels pain on his back and sees it reddening, if he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Signs that he is mortal: if he does not labor in his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come, it is the more gentle thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward if it has an abscess, if you put on the ointment of rose oil or oil of honey of bee, as long as it is calmed; then put on a comfortable plaster and bandage, and tie a ribbon, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep much in that part where he feels the pain, as long as he is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When certain bones break, if they are dislocated, cover them with a cloth; then assemble the two sides of the wound as much as possible in a straight line, and then care for the wound by applying ointment, as much as it is healthy; and if the bone of the arm is broken, which is called the "broken bone of the elbow," take your left hand pouch and put it in your right hand, then place the splint and staple on it as you can; then pull, and if it has been dislocated, if it fits, and the bone, and cure the wound as much as it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the bone of the shinbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	When the shinbone is broken, and if it is, not because of any previous injury to the head; then it becomes long, and droops, and pain comes to the hip, and fever, and the broken part swells.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is when you extend your hand over it as long as you are over the fracture; and examine what the fracture and its appearance are, and if the fracture is only at the head, then place it in natural position, as long as it is in natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it deviates from the line, if I guide the surgeon on his belly, as much as the restoration of this fracture depends on you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it evenly, if you put on the splint, then put on a piece of flax or wool, and tighten the fracture as much as possible until it does not move; and apply the legs to the sides, as long as the pain is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the wound is bleeding and comes out, if it is not stopped, as long as the wound is bled, and put on what we have mentioned before; and then return to the restoration, and tighten it as much as possible, if there is no other accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	The first sentence to translate is "de la brisure de l'ajutoire". The translation is "of
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The second sentence to translate is "Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s'il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, sekon ceste forme:". The translation is "The helper is that which is between the shaft and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of two methods: one of which is that you take a flat piece of bone from the adjacent bone, in this form:".
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	The third sentence to translate is "Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sur I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sur le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient." The translation is "And the heads of the bones can be adjusted in place, and they can be placed on the seat; then the broken bone is set on the shaft, as it goes into the socket, and has a cap of shaft, then can be placed on any light thing or extended to the end; then put the brace in the hands together, as long as the brace returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way if one sews the patient's hair on his head, and ties the hand to his neck, then command the ministers that they mark which is at the brister in his hands, and the others mark differently on all parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then pull the hand away from the brister, and take out the brister, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the brister is near the shoulder of the shoulder, then it is necessary to make the hand moist from the elbow, and the other towards the foot, away from the brister; and if the brister is towards the foot, then it is necessary to make the hand lightly, without labor, as long as the brister is even with the shoulder and the foot, then cut the brister even, as it can be, and draw it out, hold steady, no one comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	When the shoulder becomes dislocated and does not return to its place within seven days, and it is repositioned with a thin layer of oil and ointment, as long as the shoulder remains dislocated; then it is locked, and the manner of locking if it is that you place the plaster on the pulse, then assemble the arm with the helper, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and tie it, and lock with the helper and with the shoulder, so that the shoulder is in its proper position, nothing should prevent it, or if the shoulder does not stay.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	When you doubt that the bone does not move, use these, and place the fracture with a larger and stronger needle than the others, and have between each needle one of space, and so have each needle so large that it passes through the break three times of each part; then draw out the needles, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more firmly and less by moving them away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seat of the needles and the stringing, as we have said, in the part where you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess, if it leaves it to be joined for nine days, as we have said; then look at each third day's link, that pruritus does not inflame or the scarlets come to the wound because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident occurs, it should not be done after three days or more, and the patient should sleep on their side with their hands on their stomach; and then place the helper on the line of the limb evenly, and watch every hour during the day or night, to see which joint is broken and does not move, or is softened by the ligaments; if it occurs through the power of medicine, and the flesh that we have before us, in such a way that the flesh is subtle; and when it comes to be put back, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the helper and the leg should be retaken in 40 days or less; therefore, one must lubricate and administer baths and ointments for the shoulder to heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is thick and obstructed, it may take several months to lubricate.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the upper and lower "femur," where one is larger and the other is smaller, and by chance, only the large femur or the smaller one is broken, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light and the healing; and when the large bones are broken, if it is a poor healing and more lame than when they were broken individually.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it will be necessary to lightly extend and put them even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, then they must be more tightly strained; and stretch it over the thumb, and lift the palm of the hand higher than the others, and the legs below them lower than the others, and let the marrow press against itself, and the thumb higher, so that the marrow suffers no labor; then stretch the muscles of the arm to the part opposite the shoulder, or to the elbow, and some other muscles to the other side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then he places the head evenly, according to its better form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, then he puts each in its place, and if there are no loose ends that point out the joint, and you cannot restore it to its place, then as we have said before, set it and the bone.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the break there is a wound, then I have spoken to the individual chirurgeon; if they take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration there are gangrene wounds, then make a drapery of oil of rose and blennik candle, which is neither too hard nor too soft, and wrap it around subtly as long as the gangrene wounds are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then the bone, and he puts the powder of the mill with a lot of urine, puts the seeds, and makes the briseure further apart, and a little wider than the others; and checks that it has VI briseures or braces in more positions: whether it is the briseure in one of the bones, or in II; and is drawn more under the briseure than other parts, and fewer by moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and are the seeds that are under the briseure wet and moist, and not too hard or sharp; and is the filth, which is extracted, of lin, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the limb after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, if you cool the member with warm water as long as the itching is relieved; and let the member rest undisturbed.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then the swelling resumes, and if the limb is softened and the bones are destroyed, and it seems like something, it should be treated.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the knife-wounds cannot come to the member because it is too tight, such that you soften it in a poultice, and let it rest for some time until the wounds are closed and then draw it out.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things come to the patient, within twenty years.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If the shoulder is dislocated, then the patient can move their hands to their collarbone, and it should be even; and they should rest and be still, and sleep on their back; and it is hoped that this dislocation is restored in thirty years or thirty-five, and by chance in twenty years, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Wishes that on the back of the hand and in the two wrists there are few dislocations, and only painful ones, and not many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	When the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, and it is broken, and it lies straight in front of him; then he places his hand on the extended nail, and extends the fingers of the broken bones, and places them evenly in the holes, as they are well joined; then he applies plaster and bandages, if necessary, and puts a splint according to the quantity of the nail; and it is wrapped in a curve like linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the heel of the plant, then I make a spool of linen, and command the patient to pull on his broken heel; and then he pulls on a long spool, and it should be the splint as large as the sole of the foot, and it is pulled, if it can be done.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the shoulder, then it comes to pass that you place a splint on it, and another in the foot, if the hand is over-bent and straight, then the arm is completely fixed, and the limb is placed between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture does not occur in both arms, but is in one, and it is placed correctly, then as it should be; and the hand is pulled up with the foot, and you see if a splint is placed right on the fracture, and it does not move; and if the fracture is in other parts, such as the index finger or one of the others, and it is placed correctly, and the hand is held in place with the healthy finger that follows; or you tie them all together, whatever you can, or you place a splint on it, as I have said; and be careful in the restoration and the position of the wound closure, and see what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken branch
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the branch is often broken in two places, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward; if the restoration is successful, it depends on whether the bones on either side of the break are united or not.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient feels pain in their face, and then extends each muscle in their limb according to their ability; and it is when the break is complete that the bone is set.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the branch, then some of the fibers may be towards the point of the arrow, and the others away from the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And as it has reached the joint, and then release the ligaments of the joint, and extend the limb; then place the bone even with your two hands, according to its natural figure, and then insert the splint, and the bandage, if it does not move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it has been strained, if you let it rest, then return to your work and your care; the bandage is made in a partial manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the ankle with a bandage doubled in length from I to II or III, and remove any excess, then bend the leg until the heel reaches the root of the nail, and tie the long end of the bandage between the knee and the leg, releasing the joint of the knee; then wrap around the leg and the knee the bandage, then put on the bracelets, and place an estile on the bone of the leg; then place the leather between the leg and the knee to fix the splint, then start tying form III or IV on the bracelet; and as more bracelets you put on, less the leg is tightened; then take out the two ends of the thread that you have tied between the leg and the knee, and on the three estiles that are placed, then return to the knee at the chief of the thread, until you see the patella; the splint, if it does not move from its place, then let it be, then k'il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it happens, if it is not treated, and he addresses what comes, as we have said many times; and if it has pieces of bone that prick, if it can be managed, then it can; and if it cannot, then it can be cut and drained, and the cure as we have said, depending on how healthy it is.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never has the joint been broken unless it is set by oneself or the other arm; however, in the restoration that is made, it does not cause pain to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you should know that the joint is restored in L hours, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the ruler's great pain
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the ruler's great pain, there is only slight breakage, but it pulsates many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, if not but a scratch, or a puncture, and comes to all wounds, and feels pain, and that is well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when you put back what has been lost in its place as much as possible, and then apply the plaster, and put a round stitch, if you can, and draw it tight, and pull it as it should be, and reward all the dispositions we have said for other fractures, such as apoplexy and other similar ones; and if you do the same for each accident, as much as possible, and make it healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called on the right side "canine" and the other is called "fox-like," and they are both equally brittle as in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is done in the same way as the arm. And if the two bones are broken at once, then turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bones are broken, if it hurts much and you see well, then turn around.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Adonques, ensure proper extension and place it evenly; however, it is necessary to check if the fracture is stable, and if there are more pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; and align according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your operation, if you find two strips of wool that are pricking the leg on one side and the other, and are long enough from the knee to the ankle, then wrap them around the leg and tie them at both ends, and lay them along the limb, and do not let the leg shift to the right or left, and it is well; and no one has caused pain in the leg, and it was made of fist, and I put it on the leg to warn against movement, and properly done, it is made in the fracture or wound; and shake each time the leg to see if there is any swelling or other accident; if the cure is as soon as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the breaking of the bones of the hand
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is never a break, but the bones of the hand are never broken and must be careful not to twist in more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the hand are broken and you see these bones sticking out of each other, if they are so sore on the earth, just like when you were flying, then now put your hand on the side, lift the bone as much as it can be, then press it until it seems to be in its place; then put the splint and sew up the wound at the end of the thumb, then draw the cloth around the thumb, and other things that you have skill for.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the joint does not move, because you will find the bones even, they may be broken, they may be dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken, if they are repaired, as we have said, then put a splint on one of them according to the length of the other; and make a larger pouch for it, then put the pulley that I mentioned in place, and draw it gently; and if there are II or III, or more, broken, then put one on each according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, and draw the pulley away from the point of the bone; and make sure it is held steady while the belly of the point is pressed against the abdomen of the bone, so that it is well sanded.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not overlook the other things I have said about other fractures, as soon as we have said them; and treat each accident as we have suggested.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone point
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the woman's bone is broken, if it is set in place, then it leans towards the side of the shoulder, and is held by the hand; then fill the nature of the wound with cloth, and put it on as much as possible; then bend the woman, and gently raise the shoulder a little at a time, until the cloth comes into the nature, and the bone returns with the stitch; and when she sees that the cloth is wet, if the bone is wet, and when she has passed it, put it back in place, and make seven turns or turns: if the fracture is restored, and you see it, take a basin of wine, and tie it to the arm with a string, and blow all the wine into the nature; then form the clot in the arm, as long as the wine is drawn out: the nature will return to the fracture; then fill it with cloth, and leave it alone for several days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of the elbow is broken, or of the woman, if it is repaired as we have said in the elbow of the horse; and these breaks are not hidden that are near to him who puts his study and his use, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break indicates in more ways the right way of restoration: understand the direction.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the limb, when it is broken, take an ostrich gullet and pull the bone; then wrap with cloths, and leave it three turns or more outside, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a wound with pain, even if it is large, to have it treated immediately, just as the bone of the arm or shoulder, or similar, so that it becomes healthy now, since the wounds we have spoken of testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the healthy wound is scarred, if you have nothing else, then continue to restore the break at the same time tomorrow, or the next day, if you are not able to come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if you are not able to come the next day, then leave the restoration for the following day, as long as you are calmed, and do not touch it again on the third or fourth day, because you will make the unpleasant accident worse.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks, it is exposed due to the knee discovered, so it comes that you put it lightly in your hands, at a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not fit to put evenly in your hands, so if the clamp has this instrument which is of iron, which is VII or VIII in length, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this it is a matter of the shoulder that he grasps three or four, according to how much he has experience in each treatment of fracture; and it should be strong and a bit large, so that it does not slip at the compression of the member on your hand, and also in front, and large before, in this way:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called "palisade", because it requires that the heads of the bones be placed on the head of the bone; and the bore once, as it rises, and it should be even between the two.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is hidden, and the fragments cannot well grasp the bone, then it comes that you cover the head of the bone with something, as long as the fragments are in their place.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you do not reset the bone, as we have said, if it is covered with an instrument that is suitable for this, or sharp or pointed, then you should reinsert the part that has been removed from the bone with roughness and small particles.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, one should suspect that something is wrong with its natural state.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you continue until it is in its proper place, then dress the wound with a piece of black vinegar cloth, and do not put anything else on it, such as oil or grease, otherwise it will cause putrefaction and corruption; then apply ointments to the bone after resetting it, leave the wound open, and cover it with a dressing according to the size of the wound, and be careful not to tighten the wound with the fracture; often they have had this result, and have caused the patient to die or corrode never; and the stripes become more slick and slippery than the other scars.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	When the wound is large or great, and you doubt that it will come out, as we have said, and you feel pain in the leg, but it cannot be set with nails; but envelopes instead, in the leg of the nails, strengthen hard threads, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after the first or second day, if the bone is not fixed, and it has moved all around, and you have applied an ointment to heal the wound, if a medicinal ointment and similar things are used.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary that you stretch the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is not too tight and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	It is necessary that the limbs are aligned in a way that the belly is not affected lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If they persist, and the belly cannot be held back, but rather moves towards the belly, with small pieces of bones, because it is necessary that the wound is covered with tent, and all these broken pieces cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	If an abscess comes to the limb, or any other form of corruption, and you must treat it according to what is written in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	If the bone is broken and exposed through the limb, as if it were the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if you do not treat it, because often death comes several times, but leave it until it has bled; by chance, it may heal after 20 days or 30, and treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of the burns that come from the heat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come often after the hardening of the bone, but when it is near the joint, and it is a shame to see the limb in such a position; and by chance, it cannot make the limb its natural shape.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the wound is fresh: if it is treated with stupefying drugs, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and other similar things, either none of these, or all together, and mix them with warm stupefying wine or with a large amount of beer or vinegar; and put them in the mouth, and draw it well, and do not let it drip from the hands; and then draw it out, and resume another one, as long as the necrotic tissue is healed; or if you strain a piece of splint well made; for the property of the splint is that it holds all the tendons in place on the limbs; and if the necrosis has already turned into hardness, and is like a piercing, and it is bleeding from the socket, and the cope is set, and makes the apparent superfluity disappear; or if you cut it off completely, as long as it is healed, and the cure as soon as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a limb that is weak after a struggle
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and weakens after the weak limbs and subtle, if it comes from causes: either because one was too tightly bound, and was not well-bound; or because it had too many ligaments, and could not come to the member; or for a multitude of inflammation; or for too great movements, not in its time; or because it has little blood in its body, and is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And if the cure is that you make the patient drink warm water, and make the body tense as much as possible without multiplying in it; then give him cold baths, and joy and relief; then apply poultices to the limb, if it attracts the great inflammation, and the swelling often becomes acute until the inflammation reaches the member; and then he returns to his natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The dislocated limb after the injury.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is swollen after the restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the dislocated form of the limb is deformed, it is not its natural state: if one does not believe the fools who say that the whole bone must be broken at once, and all the others have done this in our land; and these bones are blamed, and great harm comes to them, and by chance they die; however, if the wounds and tortures are fresh, and it is necessary to heat them with hot water, or herbs that soften, if like cabbage, and roots, and honey-suckle, and similar things; and I apply a mollifying ointment, as well as dysentery is made, and I take the mucilage of cabbage, and cook it with lard or olive oil, and apply it on; or I take fat figs, and roast them with fat, and similar medicines that dry the sweat.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is there where the nodation is not continued and long with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is aroused and becomes painful, like a wound, and there is need for the oyster to be heated, if it comes close to the bone, by subtle and light incision; and then put on and studied in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs at no joint, if it comes now to bring sense to the target.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if we delay, if it swells, and by chance if we reset it on the shoulder; because then we cannot move it to the ear where it is swollen: many times come spasm and other pains; always, when this happens, I make the patient healthier, then let him, as long as the abscess is pained, then anoint the member with hot oil and ointment, then reset it gently, and cure each member as we do in its own shoulder.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the treatises for the dislocations of the shoulder bones.
des mandibules	for the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There are times when the mandibles are dislocated, and the dislocations of both sides are in two ways: either they are a small piece of their bones, and are softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated, and hang downwards, and cut off the saliva from the mouth that they cannot hold, and cannot close their mouth, and wrap around their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	If the dislocation is small, it returns through the more frequent positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And when it is complete and accomplished, if you reset it as soon as possible, and do not force it; in such a way that the patient's hand leaves the injured person's head, and marks the root of the dislocation of the mandible, which causes the dislocation to be of the second part; and the other two hands are deformed, to make them equal; and command the injured person to smooth and move their jaws, and all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the patient places it evenly, as it should be in its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is reset gently, at the same time, it is the second mandibles that are assembled, as long as the hands are oiled and warm, but do not force it; and do not force it as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	When they are properly realigned and the patient's mouth feels relaxed, if it is wrapped with soft cloths made of oil of rose and wax, then lightly tie the eyes with threads; the patient should sleep on their back, and their head should be between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor strain themselves, but gently eat lean meat, as long as the pain is steady and does not affect the jaws; then take what they see lightly, and do not try to open the mouth with their teeth and drink, as long as the jaw is well soothed and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be set at once in an hour and are not converted to their proper position, if fever and sickness are usual, and by chance the abdomen becomes distended, and by chance vomiting is of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	When you see this, you will know it is a disaster; many have died in nine years.
de la forcelle	of force.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot be removed by the cost of the continuation of the hand and the foot, and it is never set free at the end, but it is felt to be so.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is when the patient grows sick on his back and extends his arms; then press the palm of your hand against the cheek, it will return; then place the plaster and bandage over it, and draw it tight; and the part that is towards the shoulder cannot be set free; if not, and if it is never free, then reset it at the shoulder, as we have said; then place the plaster and bandage over it, and draw it tight, and command the patient to rest as soon as he is healthy; and then you bring back the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its socket.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways in which the shoulder dislocates: either it dislocates at the head of the bone, or at the top of the shoulder; or it dislocates at the side, and this happens rarely; or it dislocates at the back, and this is more common, and does not dislocate the elbow, because at this jump it is very high; at those who have little strength, the jump is few, and returns to a few; at those who have enough strength, the jump is many, and returns to many.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, it happens to some men that they are struck or dislocated, and the muscle of the spine is crushed by an abscess, and make sure it is not dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you examine it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And know that dislocations occur when they are pulled towards the shoulder, and make a difference between the diseased spine and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find at the top of the spine a hollow, and from there to the shoulder the top of the spine, as if it were some ones; and they cannot bring their hand back to their nose, nor move any movements; and if it is dislocated higher, if it is not hidden, because you can clearly see it at the shoulder; and this way of dislocation is not easy to put back, when it is new, or if the muscle is diseased.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the physician gently places his hand on the shoulder of the patient, then places his fingers on the acetabulum, and gently holds the joint at the top of the shoulder; he then releases his hand and extends it upwards, placing it below; if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in our hands just after, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; the physician should gently apply a soothing and softening ointment, like a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in hot water, and then soothe the patient's shoulder; then he should put his hand on the patient's back, and place a lamen on the shoulder as high as possible, neither too soft nor too hard, and then place his foot on the lamen, and gently hold the head of the shoulder with his other hand, and trace the physician's hand on the shoulder; others may touch the shoulder with their hand to make sure it does not move; this shoulder is now returning, and if you see it in this way: and that you cause the present home to be greater than the shoulder; and it should be turned towards the chest, and bend the shoulder away from the acetabulum of the shoulder, and hold the acetabulum high up, so that the shoulder hangs downwards; and others may trace their hand on the shoulder towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak, and there is nothing heavy that can be done with them, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the reduction is also done in another way: and it is like finding a long pin in the ground, whose ends are similar to those of a tent peg, and not too large or too rough; then it is placed in the patient's shoulder, but if it has been bent too much, and the shoulder is too long, then the hand is extended from another part, forming the joint, and it returns to its place quickly; and if it does not return after all these things we have said, then this treatment must be followed: take two large and four small tent pegs, whose heads enter into one another at their end, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place the forceps on the tip of the finger that is being operated on, so that it does not hurt the patient; then release the joint from the other hand; extend your arm over the long finger, and the helper's hand at the wrist of the thumb, then place the hand on the other side of the shield, and let the chest hang down from another part: the joint is now relieved.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is ready, in whatever way that may be, if you have to place the clamp on a thread of wool even, then place the powdered mill dust with incense and meadowsweet on all the shoulder blade and side, then tighten the clamp around the thread, and turn the string on the powder, and wrap your hand around the collar, and let your hand remain still.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	The following sentence is the translation: "And it is necessary to take only a little, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it heals faster; and then take more after the fourth or seventh day, and move it; and if it is tight and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	The following sentence is the translation: "And if the jointure is loose due to moisture or another cause, it is necessary to administer cauteries at three points, as it is placed before or in the chapter of cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	The following sentence is the translation: "And if you do everything, and after seven weeks, the jointure does not hold, and cannot raise the arm forward, then you should know that the nerve at the shoulder of the deltoid is compressed or extended or softened; and know that the jointure will never become tight in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first line of the translation: "The dislocation that is towards the foot, and the ankles, or knees, if it is made by impulse, and extension of hands, and it is managed another hour; and it is cured as soon as it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the cure, if there is pain in the member, and later in movement, if the patient uses warm baths many times, as long as that pain is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the expensive dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	The joint that is expensive is dislocated and returns to its place many times; it becomes dislocated from all sides, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not well set, because one can see and feel it well; it becomes dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	When you join the sharp edge with your clean hand, if you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is fine, and cannot scratch the arm, nor touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it always that the wound is closed and the vein is not cut, for if the vein is cut, it would be better to bring it back whole at all costs; and unexpectedly, it may not be possible to close all at once, especially when it is at the bottom; rather than other dislocations, it is more painful and sometimes death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is possible to return it, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms are expanded, and his hands are stretched according to the edge of the shoulder, from the outside and inside, and you bind the joint with your fingers together, or at the root of the palm, as it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when it doubles its hand on its hand, and boasts of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to the shoulder, then apply strong extension; and if two hands extend the arm, and hold it with two hands, so that it does not move at extension; then turn the arm in each part, then make a double loop of cloth long and wide; and when the patient feels the joint at the elbow, if no oil is applied to the joint, then form the joint with the joint, as it re-emerges; and when it is at the shoulder, put some dry linen with the suede on the shoulder, and form the arm, and let the hand remain in the groove of the malady, and leave a few fingers, then take it off.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is tight in its place, and it slips, and you see that the joint does not hold well, then re-tighten the splint and the joint, and leave it for some time until it is firmly fixed; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the dislocation of the joint, and it stays still, then he should bathe and rub gently, and press until it is calmed; or you can put a fat sheep's wool dressing on the joint, then leave it for one night and the bone, and let the ointment enter; when it is dry, remove the wool dressing, and then bathe or bain; and do this 2-3 times until it is healthy; if you see, if he puts on wet violet soaked with butter, and pulls it up; if it returns to its place.
li dislocation de la main	The first line of the text translates to "the dislocation of
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The second line of the text translates to "the joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is lighter than the other joints. It is necessary to quickly bring it back to its place, as soon as it is dislocated, unless the arm is shortened, or there is an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	The third line of the text translates to "If you want to reduce the dislocation, place the hand on a table, extend the fingers, and push the thumb into it until it returns to its place. Then, watch if it is well in its joint; then, place the hand on the back of your thumb on a table with extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then he should put his hand on top of his arm on the table, and look to see where the joint appears.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well if it does not, for the relief of plasters and bandages helps to calm the pain. And he should then leave it alone and try again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you do not put the joint back in the arm after some time, then the dislocation becomes more tight; and do not doubt that as long as the hands are inflamed, and nothing can be strained, then the nerves are affected, or the artery; if there is no other means than cauterization of the case, and by chance it does not work, then there is no other remedy.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hands are at the elbow, if they are placed on the probe we have mentioned, then it is tightened and left for a while, then loosened and removed.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot be moved well, and there is no swelling, if the hot poultice of wool is applied, and it is kept clean until it is dry.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never have been dislocated the hand once at any part, never on the back of the palm or stomach; therefore they are held, and the dislocation is reduced as much as possible, then hold the wrist with the other hand so that it returns to its place, then let go of the limb that has been dislocated, and leave it in its place, and then tighten the ligament of the limb, and make it move, and re-tie it; and do this often, as long as it is tightened, and if it is dislocated at the back of the hand, and do it as before, as soon as it is dry; and do this always when it is dislocated at another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	The first sentence to translate is "dou desaluement de l'eschinee dou dos". The translation is: "dislocation
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder or hip is dislocated, and there are more dislocations, if there is no treatment, because the patient dies.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The patient should note if the discharge feels like it is coming out willingly, and cannot be held, and often many parts of the body become soft, such as the thighs or arms, or the elbows. Often the discharge is in four parts; that which is discharged from the groin is called "gilbositez": the cure is if you reward the gilbositez for having come from childhood: if there is no care or sanation at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from the throat or from percussions or similar things, the ancient methods of cures are called by great words, but they do not bring much good in all; but I have abbreviated according to my intention and formed plasters in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gallbladder that comes before, there is no health or saint; and also that which comes directly in the second costal arch, and cannot be cured unless it is the one that comes to the back, as I say; and that the patient must extend the gallbladder on his face in the first rib equally, and has no strain on him, so he does not bend; then form the thong of the chief in the earth, and the other as piez, and tie one around the gallbladder's own seals, and the other as hainches, and as chevilles; and two ministers close the thongs, the one at the chief and the others as piez, among the II tisons; and they should be well closed, the tison as we have said, and the mires put his hands on the spine forming, until it rises.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it does not return through this treatment, take a third arm of long wood, carve it into a handle, and the patient should be on the side, then remove the head of the handle from the socket, then place the environment of the handle on the spike; then place the feet of the handle on the other end of the handle, and press well until it returns to the body; and if you see, do the same for the hammer that turns in the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And is it that you fasten the two ends of the handle of one wooden arm to two other pieces, and between each end, a long nail of wood; and between each end have a pertus, or the hammer turning, and let the ties be firmly in the ground, so that they do not move; and between each pair of ends, have the end turning, so that the hammer turns, and have in the turning ends two pairs of nails of long wood to turn the hammer; then the link that is among the straps of the hammer towards the handle's head, and the other link towards the feet of the other handle, and each of the ministers turns its hammer according to the link, and the masters put the spike even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is evened out, if it is moistened with a drying powder with much urine, and then the poultice is applied, and then the tablet of III doses of the gilberry salve and the healthy part of the spindle, tied with a string as we have said, and used with subtle bitters, until it is healed; and nothing comes after the healing, if it is necessary to administer soothing and desensitizing medicines with the tablet we have mentioned before; and never once does one give a piece of plaster, and never once does one appear at the back of the spine, and always one must watch that this is not dislocation; and this is the bone that opens, because one must not think that it has to be done often: by chance it might come to death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The shoulder joint and the shoulder blade joint are only dislocations, unlike other joints; and the shoulder joint is dislocated in four parts: front and back, and top and bottom; and more front than back, and less bottom than top.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocations is that when the injured leg is joint with the healthy one, it is longer and more open, and the injured bone is larger than the healthy one, and it cannot double its genu at the fire; and it is the one that is elongated due to abscess, because the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	The sign of him who comes to the hearth, if this accident is contrary to these fronts.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	The sign of him who comes to the front, if his leg is well according to its completion; however, do not double the genital area with pain, and if you see it moving, if it cannot before, and retains its urine, and wipes it, and when he goes, if passes by the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	The sign of him who comes to the rear, if he cannot expand his genital area, and double it, and that leg is more tense than the other, and the anus is relaxed, and the head of the shoulder is lower than the costal bones.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu'il laisse les poilz tant qu'ils soient lons et igals; et s'il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu'il ne se muevent tant qu'il naissent.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you manage to return the joint, and it becomes dens and deformed, and the limb is pulled to the left and right; by chance if returns, and has no other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then it may be necessary to use a strong minister, and stretch the leg with two hands, or with one that is closest to the knee; and other ministers extend their hand in this way that they stretch out their hands away from their bellies, then stretch the thigh of the leg along the belly; and others tie the head of the thigh; and extend up and down once, as long as the patient is lifted off the ground once, and does not hold on.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four appearances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not work, it is necessary to give care to the appearance. When the dislocation occurs in the jaw, it is necessary to seize the uninjured side of the shoulder, then tie the bandage at the root of the cheek, and the other hand that is loose, then tie the bandage towards the angle; then apply other measures to the shoulder of the injured side, and wrap the largest part of the injured shoulder with a bandage, and extend it as much as possible: if it returns to its original position now; and this method of dislocation is gentler than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you do not hold the shoulder in this manner as we have described, then it comes to pass that you press both of the patient's feet together with a hard lever on the two ankles, and on the two thighs, and extend the lame leg twice as much as the other; then hang it down from the neck of a post, and place the two arms on the ground; then command the minister to embrace the head of the chest, and other ministers hanging with the lame person, who embrace form the chest, because the joint now returns to its original position.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	If the dislocation is in the shoulder, and if the patient grips it as we have described in the case of the one who has gout, and tightens the lever on the lame leg properly and also the foot; then tie the knots, the one at the head and the other at the foot, then place the knot between the lame person's thighs in the form it was; and have wet cloths placed under it so that it does not hurt the lame person, then extend each minister towards it, and the patient holds the dislocation in their hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it there and press as we have said in the previous passage, and help the patient with the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, if it is necessary to extend the painful leg, as I have said; and then place the patient's hand on the painful side of the knee, and pull it towards the opposite hip.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, and it cannot be extended from the painful side of the knee, do not lift up, but it should be as it was when it was dislocated at the back, as we have said in the second chapter; and place it on your face, and extend the limb as we have said before, and must press on the joint to the table; and when the patient extends his legs, they will be equal; then straighten the knees, and put the splint on, and tie it with a bandage if the knee does not move; and rest for three or four hours, then remove the splint, and put it back on if the legs are equal, as we have said before, and leave it for three or four hours; then remove it, and let the patient walk around as much as the limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the shoulder's dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it should not be pulled to the front, nor from the side, but only behind.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	If you command the patient to bend their knee towards their thigh, and it does not move towards their thigh, then it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is if you make the patient straight, and extend the leg if possible, and put your back on their heel, and put their foot on their toes; then take the shoulder with your hands, and straighten between your two fingers, and bend the two lower bones of the shoulder; and other measures extend the foot as much as the shoulder returns to its place, and the signs are that the knee is lightly held in its thigh; and apply plaster, and make the leg aerated at the thigh, and assemble the flesh with three or four folds, then remove it; and do not move the patient's limb too much until it is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb does not exist, if extension is given, if as we have said in the treatment of the harelip, as long as it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never measured, and never completely released, but rather bent and twisted.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is if the ankle is swollen, and to try before reaching the part where it is dislocated: the hands should be light, and it should be gently extended by hand as soon as it is weak only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, if you want to put the ankle back in its place: your hand should be light, and it should be gently extended by hand as soon as it is weak only. Then sit down at your right hand, and with your left hand pull the leg; then pull the foot twice, then raise it, and hold it well on the foot; and do this twice, if we have said, ending and raising the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, if it doesn't return, it resumes the dislocation, as it does; if it cannot be returned, I make the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and fasten one of his knees firmly against the ground, and let the other leg dangle freely; then trace the movement with your hand, and have others extend the foot to your hands or to the knee where it is located; then extend each of them equally, and the patient should be between the knees of the dislocated ankle to hold the ankle in place; then put the dislocation in your hands, and have others mark the sound leg at your side, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When it reaches its point, if it is applied with plaster and allowed to dry, and the bandage forms, and the leg is held to the thigh, and the nerves which are below the ankle are not too tightly tied; then it is left on for II to III days, and if it becomes loose, then it is tightened again. Then it is removed at the end of the fourth or fifth day, and the patient is sent home with instructions to change the bandage every four days. If it comes loose before the end, it is only a matter of rebandaging.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms and comes, it is necessary that you open it if we have said elsewhere, as soon as it is healthy.
des dois	The first sentence to translate is "des
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they are extended well in their work, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no way painful to the shoulder or arm, and it is possible that you can place the patient on his side or on his stomach, then put your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot on the parts that open, as it returns; and when it is equalized, if it does not open, then place a table under the shoulder at the head of the arm, then form the foot, and leave it for three days, then remove it; and let him rest, until he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	together with wounds and dislocations
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When wounds and dislocations come together, and they are seen to be healing, often the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in your treatment, it is because you have not used it long enough, or because you have not been pitiful and merciful, and timely; and begin with calming measures for abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, then immediately set the limb to the bone, unless the aposteme has already moved; and when the limb is at the bone, if there is swelling and inflammation, and the wound is healing, and it is not serious, then dress the wound with calming measures for abscesses, and treat the wound as we have said in simple diseases; and do not enter into a state of despair, according to what I have said, because this is what you deserve according to your creator, and through the knowledge of your arm and heart.
Amen	Understood. Here is the
