O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, three sons, I have fulfilled this book that is behind the science of medicine the fulfillment of it, and made the end through its exposures and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And I came to my mind that I have fulfilled this with the cautery, which is from hands' work, it is known as "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is troubled in our region and is neglected in every way, if it is perished by science and knowledge, and there is nothing left but the small descriptions in books written by the ancients that the hands have seen.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And this has led to the error and ignorance, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will live it together by assembling the order of this cauterization according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will assemble the forms of the fire-cautery instruments and other tools of the work with the assistance of the declaration and preparation of the one, as he is skilled.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled hands masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who enters the science of anatomy, as Galen says, must know the judgment of the members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of the parts, and have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and teeth, and the number of joints, and the movement and resting of the limbs, and the fruit of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Iocras says that the non is not with the non and with the wrist is little; and moreover in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we say that those who are not knowledgeable in these things should be warned, lest they make errors and harm men; for I have often seen many of these who become involved in this science and abandon it and its science and experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I see a man who cuts off the testicle of a woman or the col of her neck, and cuts into the arteries of the col; because so much blood flows out that the woman dies in her own hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And see another case where a wound on a man's body was treated, and the wound was large; if it was removed with a piece of the bladder, and he died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I have already been called upon to treat this wound, and I see the position of the helper and the size of the wound, and if it was not cut well, it would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see another case where a man of our land, who had a broken leg, was treated with the aid of a splint and plaster; and the surgeon was greatly praised for closing the break on the bone as quickly as possible, without leaving any part of the bone exposed, and he finally terminated the treatment; and he commanded that the leg not be moved; and later, when the leg was completely healed and the piez, it came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am called to come to him, and I hurried to come limb-by-limb; and when I see it dislocated, if it is not painful and does not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways of the corruption were already confirmed or member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop spreading through the member as long as the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another mirror that will fall and be enchanted, and then inflamed by the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancre, when it is free of melancholic humor, only then does it happen that if it is not in part the limb can be completely healed what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	1. For this reason, thrice-woven threads, you should know that work of hands is divided into two divisions: it is skill, whether or not there is risk in other dispositions; and I will show each thread of this book where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	2. For this reason, keep your threads safe, so that the enemy cannot speak ill of you. Take your weapons in hand and use them lightly but firmly, and use the best way possible for the grace of God to save you and make you healthy; and let the unwholesome diseases of grief be cured; and keep your weapons in such a way that you do not doubt their power, and have faith in them so that you can come from this world to another with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galiens warn in several of their admonitions: "Do not take false remedies for your illness, so that you are not called foolish.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have found this treatment in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicinal cauterizations, and it orders the chapters from the head down to the feet; as well as forms of strangulations, and forceps for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and pricking, and ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it orders the chapters and forms of strangulations.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered by the main chief, and the forms of the stones.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	However, if we remember our work, it is necessary that I give the quality of the aid and no harm to any complexity.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid, and no harm, is the longest word and subtlest science and the secret remedy; and for this they speak more of wounds, and agree on this; and they are short in their words because I repeat the long words.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally with any complexion or matter, for every complexion: it's to know hot complexions with much matter, and dry complexions with much matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, they say cauterization does nothing and that it is great help; the other says the opposite: that cauterization is only good for diseases that come from chill and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of hot fire is hot, and should not be cured by hot disease from chill, nor by dryness; and that is what the one who says the opposite says, that cauterization helps greatly with hot diseases that come from the courage of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you perceive the heart of the patient and its moisture on the complexion, you know the heart is burning.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I concur with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it before by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all paths, it interferes with the least as those who have experienced it and know the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their symptoms and the spaciousness of tens; other complexions do not have our experience, even in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And they were found to resemble and agree with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Understand, children, that cauterization is similar to fire if it is a secret of the arts, and above all, it is an ardent medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and it only causes harm to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The ardent medicines come from one member to another by removing, and they bring the maladies of grief to the healthy state; and by chance, if the fire has too much heat and good substance, it does not cause harm, if there is no superfluity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	1. And I found this in my experiments and through the service I have provided and the study I have conducted in the art, and it is true; and for this I apologize for the length of the word, because I only want to reveal to you the secret that is inside or fire, and the quality of the work, as it affects the diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says by demonstrating; and you should receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	1. Understand, son, that the cauters should be made in such a way that they are appropriate, and they should be pried.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	1. I say that the cautery is useful in all cases because the wounds are not well placed by the help of the cautery; and at the same time, if the cautery is for necessary pains and hastens that cannot wait for the time that greatest malice does not come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think that the cure is easy, like the physician's; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and he says so; but it is not so if one takes care, because cauterization is only a medicine that dries up the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause the pain, and is as good as medicine for hastening one's courage, and for one's virtue and nobility.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	However, there is a thing that the disease does not recur again according to the complexion of the patient and the humors of the disease, and they are assembled in him, the superfluities, through the acquisition of meat and such things, unless cauterization is administered to him or he has little superfluity and moisture, like cauterization for toothache, and the humors, and only a part of the pain returns; but this does not happen often.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	1. And many people do not understand why cauterization is called surgery by some, but it is seen; however, they only believe that cauterization is effective after medicine, but we understand that it is false, and it is called surgery because when we administer remedies for any disease and they are not effective, we then use cauterization, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	2. Therefore, it is well that cauterization is called surgery, but not according to the attention of fools.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	3. The ancients said that a gold cauterization instrument was as harmful as one made of iron, and they said this because of the quality of the gold and the high content of its substance; and they said that gold cauterization did not cause any poisoning, but it is not true because I have experienced it and found that it is true in some men; and gold cauterization is as good as iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	When you hold the gold instrument, you do not know if it is hot by its color, and it has cooled down; and if you heat it too much, it will melt; so be careful with fire.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that is why we use fire cautery in our work, because it has been proven to be effective.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter of the little finger nails, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Olive oil cautery is used on moist and cold hands, and it is done for the disease called "soda," and for many humors that descend from the little finger as ears, and eyes, and numerous sleeplessness and toothache and throat pain, and also for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and semblances of disease.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: if the patient is purged by medicine that alters the crown III or IV, according to what the virtues and the age and the accustomed habits of the patient can bear; then repeat the dose of the medicine for the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then place the root of your palm between the root of his thumb and index finger; then if you have two means, either squeeze or wash the cauterization called "oliva" which is formed as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put ink on the flesh, and make it descend and tighten your hand repeatedly, then relax your hand slightly, and reward the finger if you see the bone move a little; if you do not see it, continue the cauterization as long as you see the bone as I told you; then take the gauze, and wet it with saliva, and put it on the finger, and let it lie for three days; then wet the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" as soon as it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if the ancients said that the more tense the wound is, the more it discharges; and this is because it helps to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And no one of these says that you should stretch the cauterization so much that part of the bone is raw, and then remove what is raw of the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that the cauterization should be stretched as much as possible, and if one presses too hard, it may cause the bone to break wide like a vessel because the humors flow out; and after this, it should be treated and soothed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	1. These two methods of cauterization do not seem to be the best in any way, despite their being used by many men or those who fear; and I think that I should leave them alone, as the heads of the shoulder are weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we have experienced in other parts; and even when the head of the shoulder is weak by nature, the first appearance of cauterization seems to be more salve and less painful for me, and therefore I use it in this way.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	1. of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	1. When the entire head is in chronic pain and lasts for a long time, if one must use the drugs called "cochie" and pills, as well as purification of the head and oils and plasters; and if it is done as we have described before, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	The patient's head is of great nature and should not be too tight; therefore, the cauterization is done on that part we have mentioned earlier.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each corne of the head, as we have mentioned before, and then cauterizing the lower part of the eye called "vassels"; and they are those that are placed with ventouses; and hold your hand so you do not see the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will explain later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the corneas be more sensitive than those of the lower part of the eye, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the body there is sudden pain, and it spreads throughout the disease, and the patient is purged with medicines that modify the oil, and the other treatments I have mentioned in the division of diseases are not effective: therefore, I made the cauterizations in two ways, that is, with medicinal ointment and with iron.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	If you apply a poultice of ointment and the wound comes out and becomes crusted, and then you make a temple or hold the part in such a way that you can pour the ointment of the wound; and when it is poured, if the patient holds the lip and draws it well and leaves it for 12 hours; then the lip is removed and the dressing is applied with the plaster, leaving the wound for 2 or 3 days; then you put the whole hand in water until it becomes moist.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of inflammation when it is healed; and if you see that there are no such medicines as I have written or treated of any harmful medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron burn is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron burner so that it has this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cage or has a hole like a helmet, and fits well in the painful part; and place it on the affected area, hold your hand and gently press the iron with a light touch, until the half of the pressure is relieved; and let your hand be gentle on the artery that does not burn, which is cooled down, and causes abundance of blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After taking cotton soaked in linseed oil, and then putting the limb three times; then he puts fine cotton in a burr, and then treats the limb with ointment as it becomes healthy; and if you want to cauterize this embolism with the cauterizing instrument called "cultellare" at all points, and make sure not to cut the artery in this embolism that is not far enough.
de emigraine	of embolism
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat an embolism as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and do not profit, and see that the cauterization does not help the patient and the medicine is not effective, therefore it is necessary that you take the "cultellare" cauterizing instrument while it is still white; then draw a line of half a dozen inches on the limb, and with your hand once, and pull it so as not to cut the artery and do not let it go; and take the mandible that is quiet when you cut, and the nerves only have it and spasm does not reach the pain, and take the decorrection of sang from the artery when it is coated, or coated if there is great pain and immediately to the one who does not know, and who is not studied and experienced; and leave the wound in its place; but I will tell you how to stop the sang when the artery is coated, and I will show you to the patient where he will find it in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that the cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound in the same way as we have said, and cure the wound as soon as it is healed; if you see, administer the cauterization or chapter of artery extraction, with the cauterization that has II cutels; and this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from too cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and it is heard of medicines in solution and other remedies that we have said in the division, and the pain does not stop, therefore wash this cauterization which is called "points", of which the form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cutting all around the earlobe, if it hurts when touched at the base of the ear, and you slightly separate a little bit of the root of the earlobe because you have felt the ear lobe enlarge; and do this for each ear; after cure the earlobe as much as it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with fire cautery is those that move due to fleas, as we have said in divisions of the disease; and do not make cautery like those that come from scratching and spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that is silent of fumes of pus from the head and gargle, and it is not worth, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another in the temple, and the third in the jaw; and place the cautery in the part that opens naturally, and make the cautery where the head of the ear is, and a hole in the corner of the ear, and another in the temple as long as some punches; and leave the cautery as much as half of an hour; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the appearance we have set before you, but it is a bit more subtle and should be a bit larger; after treating the leg as I have said, as soon as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is present and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make four cauterizations: two at the two corners of the mouth, the middle one, and the lower lip which is called "gashers" as we have said before, and cut it at the opening of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of opium and powdered saffron on the forehead; after that, the physician takes the medicine from the patient's hand and places it on the occipital bone with the applicator of laudanum which is written or treated as an ointment; and this is the way to perform a cauterization: if I have done it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If the patient is healthy, that's good; and if not, make three cauterizations on the forehead as you descend to the collar, placing one between each cautery of two large ones; and treat as others, and if you see another helper, and the physician is weak, make a cauterization in the same place; and if mastery is required, two on each corner, and treat until it is healthy; and the cauterization called "olivare" is like I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	The first sentence to translate is "de la froidor dou chief". The translation is
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the chief be cleansed of years and what we have mentioned before; then, after the chief is washed by the midwife, then the cautery is made on the chief and each horn, and the nose and third the spine; and if you have more skill, and the corse is wet and the midwife is sweating, and the disease is far, then make four cauteries on the spine; and let it be as long as the longest one is ars, and ease your hand; after the cure as soon as it is healthy, and as the cautery which we call "olivare" that we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	The first line of the text is "de l'epilempsie".
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptic patients should only use cauterization when they are flemmatric, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and suffering from poor medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is children who cannot suffer, I make a gargle and mastication modifying the brain often with good meats; then I send the head back to its place in the environment, and I do the cauterization according to what we have said before, the cauterization on the vein, and on each corne; and if the patient is weak and suffers, I do the cauterization as I have said to the one who has paralysis and mollification of the corpse, on the spine of the back and collar, and it is the cauterization olive according to the way we have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is awake, perform the fire cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When caused by melancholy, the superfluities or corrupted and slippery moisture becomes large, therefore, as we have said for those with paralysis, perform the fire cautery on parts such as we have described.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if caused by melancholy, the descending superfluity is melancholy itself, and the slippery moisture of the body, then it must drink something according to what the brain is capable of, as we have said in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the patient's head is cleansed; after making a well-made linen bandage, as we have said for the circle; if you put it on the patient's head; and if the patient believes it to be well held in place, and is held tightly by all parts; then present the liniment, and it is better to use ointment of barbers' wax; and heat the patient's head to a comfortable temperature, so that he can endure it; then after removing the bandage from the patient's head and letting it cool, and leaving it refreshed; and do this once a week for a week with another government, as long as it is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see that the cauterization is burned, by making more pricks all over the cauterization.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization dries the pimple greatly; then it is placed on cotton wool in a bag and greased with linen oil.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair of the eyebrows.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When hair comes first as signs that I have said in the division, then it begins and therefore drink and do this thing cleansing the head, and the warde of all moisture, and I make it soak more times in the morning.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to shave his head, and I cauterize his head, and I cauterize on the two temples where the hair ends, or in one where the hair ends is in one; and cover all the cauterization all veins and arteries that are exposed because of the skin, and let the cauterization be long according to the size of the temple; and do this cleansing of sweat, and if you see too much sweating, if it is not good as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision, how to comment on what you have; and never has it been done to burn or hurt the two bones below.
dou cors des larmes	The tears of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed, and flow down the cheeks, or through the arteries that appear to be cold and blue; and one sees that they are excessive, cold, and moist, therefore I perform the cauterization that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter for the eyes: I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on both temples, and I cauterize where the bones are hurt; and if it is necessary, I cauterize along the nose, and it becomes skilled with every small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	A great many tears flow from the eyes of the patient.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	According to the prescription we have given in the division, and it does not profit, therefore he should drink mild wine III times a day; after which he rises from bed, and I make a cauterization or an olive oil cauterization; and I make II cauterizations of olive oil that are called "clavilis" on the two thighs, a little from the legs; and you cover the artery that you do not cut.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cauterization called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the ointment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, therefore it is cauterized with this cauterization called "olive oil":
de coi ci est li forme:	1. If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	2. And if you see that I am doing this cauterization on the two horns and the hairs as they are; and do not let go of the hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	For the hair that does not have oil.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never has been found that the hair of those who have oil turned into ashes and pricked with fire, and it is cauterized in two ways: namely, by fire or by an ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then put the midwife in a clean place; afterwards, cut off the hairs with a sharp knife, making sure it is as long as the fingernail, and that it begins at the root of the hair; then take cotton wool soaked in olive oil and musk, and wipe down the cauterization area. Then shape the cauterization according to its form.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the part that you have pierced very little and often, make sure the edges are well-closed; and the signs of health of the wound are that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs raised at the point of the oil; therefore, gently press with your hand, and leave it for three days, then put fine cotton wool on it as soon as the burn is healed; after the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come out, and the paper is softened, then resume the cauterization on the same part, as you have done before; and if the hairs are long, if the cauterization is done when the paper is raised to its natural point, and is even, and does not prick the hair with the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	1. The fire cautery of medicinal herbs is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a piece of wax in the shape of a mirror; then take some French soap and live chalk, one each, and mix them well; and make it as soon as possible, if it does not cool down, then stretch it back to the shape it was before the mirror-shaped wax, and put it on the paper of the hairs; and if the disease remains in one oil only, if necessary, cover it with another; and put a soft cotton cloth in the corner of the ear; and the head of the patient is yours and show it to the medicine, and press the pouch and the lobe as often as the patient feels burning from the medicine, because he feels burning like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have this done for a long time, if the medicine does not help you.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the stitching is finished, if you lift the leg, and see that the paper is lifted as well as it was lifted by tightening with fire or by incision; and if it is, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then continue to apply medicine on the leg or if the medicine does not reach, as long as your efforts are equal, and your wounds are stitched; then put cotton wool on it as much as the wound allows, after cleaning the leg with the ointment called "dyafenis" and other, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	If you have the skill to properly care for yourself, then you should take good care of your health with great diligence so that you do not lack in medicine.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	If the paper becomes moist, and the hair touches it in oil, then the medicine is restarted on that part of the skin that has become soft from the proper paper, just as you have done before; after the cure until it is healthy; and this is the form of the fissure:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since men are of different sizes in height and breadth, according to your own measurements; and do not be deceived by the right way of that which is studied in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistula as we have described in divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not work, therefore it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in your hand; and trim his hair between your hands in such a way that it does not move or fall out; then apply cotton wool to the eye of an egg or to the juice of pearl in oil; then heat the cauterization tool that has been divided: and cauterize the head if it forms like a quill, assemble the cauterization tool so that the head is in the middle; if you see, if one end is pointed and the other is flat, and if you see, if it is like a tent; but all this, what matters most is for your own safety.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it becomes overstretched, and the matter is drained and dried; if it opens, and the bowel follows, after cutting the burned cautery, and place your hand on the cautery at the part where the fat is not greasy, so that your hands do not slip; and place the cautery in the fat of the oil, and it corrodes.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterization at the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then renew the cauterization again, and if you have experience with it, and leave it for three days; after that, place cotton wool on the dressing, and apply the dry ointment as soon as it is clean, and when forty days have passed and it is clean, if you apply an acidic corrosive medicine to the bone until it is discovered; and follow according to what comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that no ancient ones knew.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understands the fistula, and then put in the forceps I have a subtle cord of copper:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it to the amount of a .З. of plonc; and hold your hand firmly with the forceps, and do not move the patient at all, only the ploncs will be absorbed into their oil; and it is necessary to put the oil on clean cotton wool in the corner of the eye or in the ear: the ploncs if they are near the fistula, and the patient will be healthy in health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer purgatives to the newborn, and bring the fistula back to the center of the umbilicus according to what is appropriate for the specific case.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are cracks in the lips that are called "splits," and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks according to what we have described in divisions, and the patient does not benefit, then use a small cauterization tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is placed in those cavities as soon as they open; after curing the limb with cortice until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the gall
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the gallbladder or uterus, or in the roots of the teeth, and it becomes inflamed and forms a fistule; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit: therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize according to the size of the fistule; after the bite or rupture of the fistule, and hold your hand until the fire comes out of the wound, and if it is inside the limb; and then make once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, as soon as it is healthy; and if it is cured once or twice, it is good; and if not, you must discover the limb and open the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it does not work, then put a poultice of bad herbs on your gum; after that, wash the cautery that came from this part in this way, so that you put a cord around the tooth; and remove the teeth from the cautery as quickly as possible, and hold your hand tightly with the bad pain coming from the root of the tooth; then gently release your hand and continue the cautery according to your will; then fill the bad herbs in your mouth with rotten flesh, and chew it for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gum becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture is dried out and becomes hard.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from cold, or it is cold or visible, and the remedies of medicine do not work, then there is need for cauterization in two ways: and cauterization with a burr and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with a burr if it is such that you use a sheep’s wool burr and the end in a iron or copper cup; then take cotton and wrap around the point of a needle, and make it burrowed in the painful tooth as much as it is cold; and often I do this until the virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are burned in the burr, and put on the painful tooth and put on the iron chair as much as the flesh reaches to the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	1. When the fire cautery is used, if it is as hot as a hound of iron or fire, and is large enough to reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, shape it according to this, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cool; do this often because the pain will be eased for either the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	2. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with a hard ball in the pressure of this cautery, and then releases it; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cut as you wish, according to what you have to; and this is the form of the knife:
des scrophules	of scrophulous tumors
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophulous tumors are soft and cold, and do not respond to digestion with medicines, then clean the scalpel of the knife after it comes out of the form, and make two openings for the smoke to issue from the other side; and place the scalpel on the abscess once, or as it is fit, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place the scalpel according to the amount of pus, and leave it there for three days; and wrap the wound with damp cloth as soon as the wound oozes; afterwards cure the wound with purges and ointments as soon as it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the collar:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistors enter the throat, and at the same time when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must be treated first with soluble medicines; after that, I perform a fire cautery at the base of the chin, and make sure you do not go too deep into the chin, and only burn a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, I perform another cautery at the joint of the shoulder and the head of the spine, and it is called the "clavicle"; and cure the limb as we have said, so long as it is healthy.
de la toust	Of the entire
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and disease of porphyria are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever and is not sweating, and it is an old disease, then make incisions with the forceps on the parts you want; and the other cauterization is made between the second and third toes; and that which is called "clavicle" according to the form mentioned earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cauterization by pricking all the points called "points" in the form of the disease of the ears; and let the points be as many as XXX, or less.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the wound according to what has been said above, and if it is a burn, then apply the cauterization of III rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because they are lighter, because you make 3 in one piece.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After soaking the patient's back and chest in warm water; after relieving the pain caused by the titillation, using your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, then apply the cauterization as follows:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	When the tail of the dog is burned as soon as it is pricked, and the surgeon performs four cauterizations; because it is made with a cauterizing iron that has three points, because the appearance of cauterization is six points; and the points are according to the subtlety of a tent and are the form of the cauterizing iron that has three points:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is adjusted this point because it has eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After you put the cauterizing iron on the point and press with silk; after the patient is rested, and do not move the limbs too long until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	When the dislocated head is reset, it is difficult to move, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. Therefore, a cautery is performed on the large part of the cautery clavicle, or the tip of the cauterization when touched.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient's health is improved.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moisture come to the stomach and it is pulled out of its complexion, and the purges are multiplied for him, and the customary cures are made, and he does not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back, and his legs and hands are extended.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	1. From this, I made three burns on the inner thigh for the quantity of a dozen, at all the cauterization points, and two burns to divide the two costals as the cauterizations appear to be at three angles, and there should be some space between them so they are not joined together as they grow sweat; and the cauterizations should be so that they pierce the two parts of the knee, and the figure of the cauterizations should be according to this form in agreement.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	1. And if you see a large burn on the stomach according to this form, and the one who has pain from this burn should cauterize by touching and pressing on the stomach at the point where you see the quantity, then cauterize all the points called "points" on the cautery.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure we underwent, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver causes pain from constipation and moisture, as long as it is healthy; and the patient is treated according to what we have said in divisions, and if it does not benefit him, then the patient should be burned on his own will; and sign of enche III cauteres according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, defend the hypochondriacs, or the part of the stomach comes; and let there be space between each cautery and the growth of a do; and they should be long enough in the corps, and do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterization; and it should be only the half of the moisture that is in the keur, and the patient should be supported by his hands; and if it cannot, then let him be stretched out, and lift his legs; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you wish, if you burn these sharp cauteries, be subtle and gentle in the art, and make sure you do not burn all of it, for you will dry up all the body; and that it does not become muddy, because the hair is very delicate everywhere, and you see to it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has ascended to the liver, and you see if it is in the liver or in the cloth: if it is in the liver, it feels the pain of the physician too much; and if it is in the cloth, it feels a sharp pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure has closed the wounds, if it comes that the physician is subdued by his head; and then open the arm or where the cauterization was, and then heat the cauterization which is like a raisin, according to what form it has.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	For the fire cautery, cauterize as much as the hair is long and straight, and it will not fall off, until the poultice is completely dry; after the cure according to the cure of fluids as soon as it is healthy; and it is only necessary that this cauterization be used by none other than those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by their hands these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Can it be done boldly, and I seem that it is not worth leaving.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Dou cauterization of plasters
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make of plasters made from the roots of Aristolochia, and in this way: take a root of Aristolochia as long as you can find it, and it must be dry, and as large and long as your two; and mix it in oil, and take it to the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the force and the col, and two punctures cauterize a small hole in descending in the part that is rough like the beard; and two punctures between the fifth rib and the seventh, declining downwards a small hole; and the cautery on the chest, and the other in the stomach, and between the shoulders, and the ones deferring the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press too hard with your hand, as you open it as you smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no ancient one has ever said that any man uses a fire cautery like this, and they thrust it and place it between the ribs, as soon as it reaches the abscess; and then there is great pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, there is no pain or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be saved.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have described, and it does not benefit, therefore there are three ways of cauterization that you know.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	1. If you are making three incisions or four, according to the length of the hairs, following the pattern of the cauterization of the fat that we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand on any part of the cauterization, and let the patient's body be on his back; and another way of cauterization is if you scrape the cauterization that has two needles, as we showed in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the knee where the hairs are, or the pain from the patient's body comes from the side, and let the elevations that you lift on the knee according to the knee, according to the length of the chest, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the chest.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After burning the two nerves until they are perceived from the other side, and then use the cauterization tool, and then apply it to each of the four points. If you see, cauterize the entire cauterization tool to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten colic due to long tenacities, and this is what the other treatments before said.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not suitable for dropsy, for it is called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations into the abdomen, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the gallbladder, and two at the back of the spine, and one at the root of the piss; and let the cauterization be close to the espience of the cur.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the cauterization, let the patient have loose stools, and do not withhold the care of the malady after the cauterization; and soon the healing will come, and the two thoughts will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterization for the belly is the clavicle that we have shown before; and on the back it is olive-shaped, according to what is placed in front.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the enflaming of the wounds
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the wounds are enflamed by the humid, and are plain yellowish, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of it between the auricular and the anusular, and gently hold the cauterization with the cautery so as not to turn.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much in front, otherwise the patient's skin will be burned, and the cauterization should be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two cauterizations on each leg at the cuticular point; and the cauterization should be long, one in front of the genital area and the other behind, along the leg; and leave the cauterizations to heal for as long as necessary, according to the patient's condition; after the cure of the other cures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and vitals that are in the stomach and intestines are distended, and cannot be cured by any means of cures; and you see the patient very suffering and of strong greenish color, if I make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or on the stomach, at the cauterization circle; and four cauterizations are made around the bowels subtly, at all the cauterization clavicle subtle, and two cauterizations are made on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see much moisture and the patient is suffering, make the fire cautery on the point, and the cautery on each side, and the cauteries on the stomach below the great belly button, because the cure is beneficial when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are either fundament or one or more, and are old and large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and if they do not profit, if you make cauterizations: III on the spine of the back, which is all deformed and bent, and the cautery on the anus II doses; and if you think that the stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and the face swells, then the face on the greatest cautery on the stomach, as it is said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the gallbladder at all the cauteries clamped; and leave the cauterization over long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the wound has healed to the point of being healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the chalcedony which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply theelul, if the cauterization tool appears to be too hot, then put it on all burned over the thelul; and leave as much of your hand as the cauterization tool comes into contact with the vein, without cutting; do this once or twice, and if it causes pain in the thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after treating wounds as much as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cauterization tool over the charcoal, it will give more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear tightening or opening, which we will tell you in his case, if he comes to a more serious illness that cannot be cured by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no fistula, and it is awake and has sweat and putrid milk, if you provide enough of this subtle tent, and make sure to hold the entire tent as much as it has to.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the cauterization is washed and the bougie is placed in the fistula according to the quantity that enters, and the cauterization is resumed as long as the corps porris and are corrupt; once, or II or III, according to the amount of blood; and you should be aware of the nerves that are affected, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	1. If the fistula is in the course of the vein and the intestine, and these are made only in the testicle, and believe that it is not a rare thing; after healing the testicle as much as it is healthy, and if the leus is removed, and the materials are long bones, then heal that the testicle is completely healthy; and if the materials are long bones, heal that the testicle is entirely healthy, and if the materials are not bones, heal that the testicle is missing, and corroded the bone at its root.
de la maladie des reins	The disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the kidneys comes on, and is accompanied by large stones, and no woman can bear it, then it is necessary that you have it cauterized on both sides of the kidney using the cautery iron we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in a moment, there will be three burns in line, and they will cause more relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is full and weak due to kidney stones and moisture, if the patient retains urine, then you should cauterize in the part where the urethra meets the bladder, on both sides, and so on for each; and you should also cauterize the back of the bladder, or the other side; and so the cauterizations should be made according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marriage is cold and wet, and does not allow for conception, and the flow is corrupted and delayed; and when they come, they feel great pain: therefore it is necessary to perform the third cauterization at the end of the boudoir, as we have said or cautery of the vesicle, and II cauterize the back; and if it is a nail cauterization, as we have said.
de la hainche	The second sentence to translate is "de la hainche
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the thick moisture descends to the hip of the horse, and for this reason if it is still from its leeway, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the winds are in the wrong department, if it comes that you cauterize the patient on the hip of the horse at the cauterization like a circle, and set before the leeway around the hip so that the hip turns the circle; and if it is such cauterizations as those we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, make three olive-sized cauterizations on the skin, and they should be as large as all the keys; and the cure will be when it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the chest
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the chest, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure is not effective, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of large humors with bitter pills or other bone-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the way of cauterization is according to two ways: it is to know the combination of burning medicines and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	1. For the fire cautery, if it is done correctly, there are several ways to do it: that you should cauterize on the handle of the thorn III, cauterize in a triangular shape according to this form, and make a deep and large wound between each cauterization of the spice, and it should be olive oil; never done once cauterized on the root of the thorn, because it has 4 according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	2. And if you see, if the cauterization is done at the circle we mentioned in the dislocation of the thorn; but do it in a different way that the circles contain the entire thorn, and all its points no matter how small they are.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is the manner in which one treats sciatica, when the pain remains in the buttock and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And when the pain reaches the thigh and leg, one must cauterize either the ankle or the knee, according to what the patient says the pain is located. Four times, on the left side, a small poc; and if it is the cauterizing cuticular, and if it is the flesh that feels the pain spreading to two points or nearly, then it should be cauterized at the point where it feels the pain, which is called "points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is in the groin and goes towards the thigh, then cauterize with a circular or cutting cautery, and be careful with all your cauterizations that you do not burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause further harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen others who have cauterized on the ankle and burned so much that the entire leg became swollen, and the foot as well, and it was noticed and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the stomach which caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	If the pain is in two parts assembled, perform cauterization on both, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	The wise say in the cauterization of the thigh, whether it is this way or that, make a piece of iron as follows: make it so large as a nut or a smaller one, and so by interlacing and so between interlaces the quantity of a new pea; and let the interlaces be over two parts, and also like nozzles, and have a good handle; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be washed as much as it is all red and greasy feels, then put it on the malleable cheek of the shoulder, and bend it over the costal bone; and cauterize once the cauterization re-enters and leaves three jaws; then make an ointment plaster, and let the wound be turned out long tent; after the cure of the ointment as it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this burn for the pain of the patient, and soon it is all that is used; and all this is caustic herbs, which they can endure, and the more it is applied, the better it is for the patient.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The medicinal burns if you make them and instruments of prongs inserted between the door's margin, and either of iron or steel a long pole, and in the upper part have II us, and between each of the quantity of growth of one do; they are overgrown and united, and are joined together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the heated spoon against the patient's shoulder, gently press down on the spoon; then, leave it in place for an hour, allowing the patient to feel the pain and the cold of the spoon.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the cauterization is as painful as fire; when the cauterization has been made, hold the instrument with your hand and gently lift the spoon from the shoulder, leaving it for three days, and then leave it as long as the black part of the burn remains intact; and this will be helpful after the treatment of wounds as soon as it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that matches according to what you have done in the flesh; and this is the way of the hot tool, and I have written or described the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Prepare acid and live fire, as much of one as of the other, and mix them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or if there is a small hole that the point of a razor can enter; and then put some of this pot in another pot well-ground, and put in alkaline and ash and softened water until you have enough powder to taste with your hand; and let it stand until the water becomes ague and chicory or can be ground, then take all this water, and grind it with alkaline and ash as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	When it happens that the patient is cold and feels weak in mind and body due to lack of knowledge in surgical procedures and cauterizations of other parts, and if other medicines are used that cause similar effects as fire, such as burning hazel and anacardium and calamus with soap, all these things mixed together will help.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galen tells us of a remedy by which some were cured of the pain in the cheek and sciatica, and he says that no other remedy is needed, and that it was effective once for every time this remedy was applied, and he was bathed in the same way as he instructed afterward.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And then, in one manner, you should take a warm and dry cloth, and rub it with a little grease, and place it on the shoulder, the thigh, and the leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for three hours, according to the amount that the patient no longer feels the pressure.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then, I will make him enter a bath as much as his chest is raised, and then I will let him lie down, and the pain will all leave and he will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And advise that no one should use such a hot cauterizing medicine after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	When Dyascorsides says that when the scientific vein is cauterized with the horn of a goat, if it helps, then it must be done in a certain way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the linen and oil it, and put it in the socket that is between the thumb and little finger and the other which is called the fossil.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After drying the goat horn and heating it until it is charred, and then putting it on the linen, and leaving it as long as it remains stains; and then again, and as long as you think it is about to reach the cheek, and that the pain is gone; and this way of cauterization is called "cauterization with goat horn".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by touching or drumming or from too much evacuation, or from the expansion of cold matter, none of these appearances warrants cauterization, rather it is for the one who has come from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the patient has been freed from bitter pills or other appearances, that you make an incision on his back, where the pain remains, three lines of "enche" are marked, and in each line, V cauterization or more according to the skill and quantity that the patient can bear; and it should be done according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see, make III cauterizations or IIII on the clavicle blade according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	The disease comes multiple times to these children many times, and the signs of the beginning are that they constrict when they start to grow, and fear; and you see the spine with a hook on the back and the appearance that comes with the other hooks.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it cured, if it is burned at the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cautery darkens each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if it is burned at the spine with the fire cautery pricking two or three lines, and they are points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the wound as much as it is healthy according to what we have said, and if you do not want to perform a burn in silk that is in the spine of the neck.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints comes from moisture that has expanded to every part of the body, and when pain comes in the foot, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is of a cold cause and remedies of medicines do not cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way: make the cut on the outside of the joint, and the cauterization should be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	If it is necessary that you prick the face with a sharp object, then perform the cauterization on the entire cauterization as claimed "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	If the pain comes to the joints and other parts of the body, and this happens many times, then cauterize each joint III or IV of each part on all olive cauterization; and if you have skill for more, but do not hold your hand too long as much as it hurts.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	If the pain descends to the joints and back, apply the cauterization we have described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	When the pain is in the hands, if it continues for a while, I make points on both lines of the frost; and if there is no more pain, I make points at each joint and at the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes from the wrists or shoulders, I cauterize each part, and give the patient medicine and government to the midwife.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make the midwife give medicine and purge the poison, she will be healthy in the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the face
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes with groans, and the blood drops down in streams, and it is new, if it comes to your notice that when you cure it, it will not leave the other side; and that it uses things that lighten the belly, if it descends from its belly; then make it lie on its back between your hands, and command it to lick its own tail as much as it can, and draw it towards your two hands, and sign with a circle around the bone of the other shoulder, and in all signs that it resembles a half circle around the other side; then wash the cauterization with the form of the cauterization:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and has a taste.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the dirt from your leg; and the surgeon will touch his hand to ensure they do not return; and work well on the thighs with the patient, and put the cauterization sign on all your hand, and hold it straight and as far as you can reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you touch the bone; and be careful that the dirt does not seep out when you make the cauterization, that you do not burn it; and so that the patient does not die or suffer from other wounds.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know that when you do not come to the bone with the cauterization, your efforts are in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be done subtly according to the size of the bone, and large people as large; after three days, care for the child's head with a burn so that the pain is eased; after treating other wounds as long as they are healthy, and gently touch his back for as long as the wound is well-sored; and it is necessary that his nails be kept long, so that the excrement does not come out when he goes to sleep in rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to rise, he will find a well-made girdle around him, and after forty more days; then he should rest, so that he can work quickly and avoid excessive drunkenness and vileness, and excessive braiding; and when he makes this teaching, it is completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after the trimming in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not increase, if the cauterization is done according to its quantity, and according to the third angle of this form; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at three angles according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But the first sign of the bone is the fracture and draw a line for the length of the rupture, and another for the width, and hold the patient's hand tightly at all points of the cauterization claw.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	However, the first cauterizations are more gentle and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of pain in no member.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any member, whether from cold or wounding, and this pain lasts long, and the cure with medicine is not enough, then it must be cauterized at the cauterization called "points", and the cauterization according to the length of the member, its width, its strength, its virtue, its location of torsions and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first burn is not deadly, it's well; if the name is different, continue with another burn on that part, because it is customary that one must die at the member that it is directed to, but if the patient is alive, then you should make the burns as many as necessary for the patient to be healthy.
de meselerie	of malediction
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The curses are never helped by burning once, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the burning, when the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not delay or tire, and you doubt that corruption will corrupt all the patient, then I make the burns on the head: I cut off the head, and the other towards the front at the end of the cheeks; and they touch the corners, and the heel to the hips; and I let your hand as much as the burn goes to the bone, and as much as the pus comes out so that the vapors of the large humors can come out; and you cauterize on the mouth according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	When the burning is everywhere scarce; and it manifestly appears, if you cauterize the wound with these cauteries that we have mentioned or chief, and the cauterization in one place, and the cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and on the spine of the back, and on the crupper and the other parts, and the shoulders, and the wrists, and the tendons of the fingers, and all the joints of the hands and feet, and the fissures of the hands; and you wear bandages that are placed behind the burns, which are not burned, so that you do not burn them; and never once has a cauterization been made on the bone of the elbow, and the other on the stomach bone, and the other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	When more you burn, the more help you give, and profit from it; and advise the patient that the patient does not feel pain in the burn if it is as healthy as it should be, because the heart is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the burn be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the head with flour several times with honey and other remedies as long as it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes to any part and is cured with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healthy, then the burn is made on the member according to its size and thickness; and let the burn be entered into the side of the ear; then the care of ointments as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	1. And no time is made when cauterized on the hand, arm, and back, at the end of the nerve that is silent to the member, and if it is not enflamed; and none enters if it is not known of the members and the issues of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	2. Of scars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	3. When the disease called "scars" is awakened, and the art of medicine does not help, then cauterize with a cautery once or twice, according to the amount of the vesicle, as long as the blister is ointed and has its color; then use flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and scabs of colon and almond, of each part; and mix all together, and wrap it with a cloth, and apply to the body as much as it is needed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the sore first appears, and you see it stop, if the cauterization is done at the cauterization point that seems to be a circle, then turn it completely around the entire sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the wise ones say that cauterization is done in the environment of the sore; and it seems to me that this is not the best, because I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have always wanted this to happen once; and the most appropriate thing is that it is cauterized around, at the cauterization point called "circle", if as we have said, cauterization is done.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the inflammation that cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	If any have a disease called "adubelati", and it lags in measuring either due to excessive discharge or because the patient's condition becomes too weak (that is, too many) and there is little blood, or for other reasons, you see it lagging in measuring: therefore, the cauterization is performed by inserting small cauterizing pins as they are pricked; afterwards, they are left alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will lag in measuring.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it lagging in measuring, if the cauterization is hot and this form is not suitable,
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the environment of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization is perceived by the ear, and it is such that the patient feels pain in a certain way that the course of the sweat is agile.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, if it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cauterization by fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a mangy of the limb, because it eats the limbs as much as it does the dry sticks.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the leg that can suffer cauterization by fire, then sharpen the cauterization claws according to what is needed in the leg where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts as much as possible, there will be nothing left of it, that everything that is corrupted is not osteit.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then let it remain for three days, and put on the burned parts with oil as much as the burned eschar is large, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the care of burns caused by fire.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If you see after three days that healthy burns do not appear, it is good; and if not, continue the cauterization on the parts that are still corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	This remedy has never been cured by medical treatment in the place of fire cauterization; but all cauterization with fire is greater help, and I have already said the cure of the medicine ague in the division: take what you have skill in.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the pores that come as pimples
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that the pimples are caused by inflammation, which is called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that darkens the skin.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatment of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is known as fire cauterization, and hot iron cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is when you heat the iron and press it onto the skin, like a pin of fire, and it is made of red-hot iron according to the size that can burn through all parts, and has fine margins; after that, you put everything on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the point of the nail; and it leaves three days before it starts to secrete sweat; then you make a poultice of well-cooked mugwort with milk, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will become unrooted from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat the wound with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	If the wound becomes infected many times in the hands and fingers, then and only then is it necessary to perform a cauterization with hot iron; and it should be done in this way: take a piece of iron or steel, or a thorn, and fasten it to the nail and the althelul, which is to cover warts; then place the iron so that it burns everything around, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn until the edge of the iron touches the root of the nail, and find the hot water way perfectly at the root; then suffer the pain of the hot iron for a little while, then let it fall, and it will all fall off at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	I will create another step, as long as you are able to handle all of these, then cure the wounds that have been inflicted with fire.
li cure dou trembler	I will cure you so you do not tremble.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If you tremble from cold, or fever, or other causes, it is necessary that you have four cauteries or four spikes, one between each spike; and one spike at the top of the stomach, and the others in the olive oil; if this helps to stop the trembling, and cure the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pimples that have been inflicted with fire.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	For no time do blisters or pustules appear on the body, which come from large corrupt materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary to cauterize as soon as they appear, use a subtle cautery made of martial pitch, or the point can be held in the fire, or the cautery of Aristotle's root, or the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never have the cauteries been made at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they do not grow new wounds in front, but are destroyed by the superfluity that comes, and they are cured; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the arrow is seized
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times, great dislocations of blood from the arrow that is seized at the wound which comes to the pardefuers, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the fire cautery of the member, and such things; and it is a great grief to open.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And when there is none, if you have to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tight until it is calmed by your thumb, and does not cause pain; then heat the olive-oil cauteries more or less according to the size of the wound, and I will do it myself or according to the size of the wound and the lesion on the limb and the arrow that is routed, and place the cautery on the vein where you hold your thumb, and hold the cautery as long as it is not re-injured.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If it is hot when you tighten the vein with your child's head, and the cautery ends, then quickly take another cautery that is hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue doing this one after the other until the nerve is not inflamed, and no other harm comes to the patient; and be cautious that when without cutting the artery, you can hardly endure the pain immediately when the artery is large, if it is not by one of the four methods we have mentioned: by cauterization or extraction when it is properly treated, or by gentle twisting, or by medicines placed on it that may cause inflammation; and let it be tied and extracted.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will carefully manage the remaining of the thread, or to put things burning on, or other similar things, should not profit from it if not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is none, and no good or bad medicine is present, then he should put his index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly press until it is sore from the wound and the vein; and he should not move, but rather let it be cold often that it is not frozen and swollen and sore; and make inquiries about those who are skilled in cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	For the first chapter of medicine, we have told you about all diseases that require cauterization with fire or burning, and their causes, effects, and forms of cauterization; and I will go to this chapter as my own way because it is lighter to handle than the other.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	However, before I begin this, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	I warn you not to attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who are so attached to their disease that they die easily by the severity of their disease and its greatness; and from these we should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who understand you and say, "Wait, I am coming"; and the disease is unscrupulous.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It only requires that you allow those who come to you to have this manner, but put more respect in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not give in too easily but wisely of what you are certain, and what you can take; and use prophecy and indication in the cures of your diseases for the health of the patient; and this will help to your good reputation, glory, and memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very fine thread, our Lords give you understanding and straightness, and if you wish to hope for the holy inspiration of her hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have commanded this chapter in stating that it is a cauterization, according to the cauterizations, which I have commanded for the chief joints, because you will find it more lightly than other things.
dou chief plein d’aigue	dough, chief full of acid
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Scars that this disease comes from the children many times in the mother, and when it is pulled too hard on the child's head; and never has it come from a cured cause that it is not.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease occur in adults, and in all the cases I have seen, death followed; and for this reason I think it is worthwhile to briefly mention some treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen children of this age, and the head grew larger each day until it could no longer support itself; and it was thought that it was due to moisture, and this moisture is assembled between the skull and the sinus, from the ear to the skull; and the dislocations are such that when the skull is moved, the most painful spots are found between the ear and the skull, and the abscesses are small, so that you can cut out the child's head with a wide incision; and so long as the moisture increases, this form of the disease will be present.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more intense, and the abscess is larger, if I make these cuts in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is deep into the bone, and you see the commissures of each part of the chest tightened, and the water gushes out when you press on it with your hand, and this has not been done before: then it may be that you cut through the chest III times according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After removing the dressings and powders, and applying wine and oil, and letting it remain for five days; then remove it, and cure the wound with bandages and poultices, and make the chest even, and then grease the dry meat with as little moisture as possible until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to look at or open the large opening of the abscess, and the assembled angle; for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Measure the size of the abscess opening and the angle of the wedge, and they are made according to what you have; and do not block the artery; and come out with blood, if the patient dies from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	from remedy
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is a disease called "cataract" that appears in the eyes or the nose, and the disease is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help much, therefore it is treated with cauterization if it covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	1. It is therefore necessary, can you see the eyes, that the patient makes his head; then rub the face of the shoulder with a rough cloth as much as the arteries are visible, then pull the head on all the cloth; then look if the eye blinks, and both are after the ears, and few are replaced; then sign the eyes to swell, then cover one and the other with a sponge of ice for about two minutes, until the size comes close to the bone, and that is by the wide shape of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	2. And if you see, cut the cloth over the artery and cover with the sponge, by cutting as much as the two doses.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is pricked, if it bleeds continuously without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at touch, then measure the amount of blood that flows out and make a slit about three inches long; and if it is necessary to put in more than six cc, and perhaps a little more or less depending on what the patient can bear, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if it does not stay against the bone point, and the coagulation that was made does not come out, then hold the wound and tie it tightly, and the cure with antiseptic as long as it remains healthy.
de emigrainne	The first line of the text is "de emigrain
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the head aches and is hot, and there are gouts of blood and tears in the temples, and the pain becomes severe, and it is treated with medicines and all sorts of remedies, but they do not help, then we cut the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them if the patient has many hairs on his temples, and understands which artery is open in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is quickly repaired rather than in any man who is too old; and when it is repaired, if he draws his collar tight around the patient's head, then wipe the neck with a dry cloth, and rinse it with hot water until the artery is clearly open; then take the spatula of the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly burn the leather until you feel the pulse, then take it up high with pincers, and remove as many threads as possible from each part; and if the pulse is weak, if it turns at the tip of the uncinate, then the hook of that part follows according to the number of the two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	If it is not caught, then it will not be held at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And remove five drops of blood, as much as possible; and if the pulse is large, then it will be found that you lie in two threads of a double-strength silk, which does not come before the wound, and comes off with the sanc; then cut away the superfluity that is between the two hundred and sixty threads at that hour, and then, if you see, if the cauterization is done with five drops of calf skin as much as the bones until the heads are caught; and this is the hardest work, if the malady does not have fever and it is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is help to finish the moisture: because it is of greater aid to moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries is to fill the vein with much cotton and put on well-made tents; and if you loosen them, be sure to use dry medicines that make the wound healthy, and tents as long as it is safe; and if there is no cut in the artery, as you do, if you hurry through cauterization, or use your legs of glass and pull it to your hand that is not yet frozen; and if you don't have this present, then put on the leg your should as much as it is not frozen, and rinse the leg with cold water as often as it is necessary, and be stretched as it is necessary; and what is more difficult and lighter in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein from this cautery sharp trenchant of II part, but the trenching should be well spaced to last longer for the choler.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the wound is too large, it holds less blood.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two edges at least as much space as a walnut, and when you see that the two edges are closing, and hold the fire hot until it reaches the bone, and close the vein in the two edges; and they must be separated between the two edges because it is not sufficient to cure this burn completely; and this is the shape of the burn:
des larmes	of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes fall on the veins that are exposed to the heat of fire, and it does not profit much for the cure of medicine, and you see that the face of the patient is swelling, and it feels as if the front of the head is moving, and the hair is wet and moist as if the paper were cut, and the papers are torn and burned by the heat of tears, if it has to do with this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	1. And they called the old "traumatic cut", and that is when you make a cut on the patient who has this disease, the hair or front, then I made three cuts on the front according to its length; and one of the cuts is like the other two on the front by advancing the knife, and the others are the costels by passing through the papers, and keep away from the incision of the arteries that are the costels by passing through the papers; and separate your hand from the continuation of the mandibles, and each wound is the quantity of three to the traverse joins; and you have appeared a piece of sponge and moisten the cloth with the blood of the sanc, then stop the spatulum agut of the two parts of this form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	The first sentence to translate is: "Of the incision that cuts through the temple just as the second incision; and burns all that is between the two fingers of the entire face that is exposed to the bone, then makes another part of the third incision just like the other second, and then extracts this splinter.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If blood flows in the first cauterization using the instrument called "cultellary," which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, do not cut it, and this is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge of the blade towards the horn, and the costeit becomes blunt towards the bone, and the blood stops when it reaches the first cauterization.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And close all the veins that descend from the head as much as the incision is continuous until it opens the horn, and then another time in the first cauterization just as the other does; and then extract the blood evenly, and express the leeway for the blood taken; then put a soft cotton glove in each fendure, and put smooth flannels soaked in wine and oil and vinegar on top, and make sure that the sleeves do not come off; and when you take off the linen, and apply great amounts of cold tede ague, then treat the wound with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other ointments as are used for plaies, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	This translates to: "He pulls out the hairs.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	This translates to: "If no bloodletting is practiced regularly, and you see the hairs growing long and thin, and the eyes wandering, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and there is great pain in the head, and the patient is weak; therefore, one should be cautious of these accidents, as these materials and this bloodletting only serve to weaken the body, and the cure that follows is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	This translates to: "And is it that you command the patient to shave his head, then make a deep cut on his forehead, and another wide one in the cheek?
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	1. And it begins with the burning of the left temple to the right temple, and it is the incision into the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move in the cheek; and when the bone is discovered, if all the blood comes out onto a sponge, then dip between the two lips of the burning and put cotton on top, and line with linen; then wrap the wound with ravelled wine and oil, and keep away from gangrene; when it is healed, if it comes to pass that you rub the bone as much as char and begins to rise, then the treatment of things exiccatives, which make char.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In the same manner: take two parts of oatflower and eight parts of linen thread, and make a paste; and apply this to these wounds for healing them completely.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear drum
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that is in the ears is one of the four things: grains, stones, mines, or similar things; or seeds, like beans, peas, and chickpeas; or things that flow, like acorns and almonds, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When he pierces the ear drum or any other part of the ear that does not fit well, or grows in the ear, he should put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the wound, and there is no drop of violet oil or linseed oil, then extract it; I make the wound clean, and the patient sneezes as they extract, and put a piece of cloth or thread into the ear; and the ear becomes plugged.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	This treatment is often successful; and if it does not work, then the patient must undergo extraction with forceps, and the form is as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps with the forceps, it is wrong; and if not, then undergo extraction with a small double forceps; and if it does not jump with this, then make a loop of thread and pull the end of the tail or ear hole, and plug it with wax so that it cannot enter with the loop; then the treatment is formed, as we have said, since it often comes out in this way; and if it does not come out in this way, then take some glue on your fingers and put any instrument that can be used to do this without causing pain, and put a piece of cotton inside; then press the glue on the wound or whatever it is, and treat.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she does not flee from all these things that we have said, and if you continue to force the ear even though it is swollen and spasmodic, and the manner of forcing it is that you first make the patient of the head more comfortable with the salve, according to the measure of its virtue, then hold the patient's head between your hands and turn the ear away from the wind, and make a small prick at the root of the ear in the grease or where it depends; and let the prick be as a moon, as you go towards the point, then the bone will according to your strength, and the salve will hasten to your mouth; and the cure so long as it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is a grain that is in and it swells, then apply an extraction; if it cannot be excreted, then apply the spumous substance according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and apply an incision to that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not cut it if you think the grain is moist from the earwax, as long as you have done many pieces; then extract it with soft pincers and honey, as we have said, if the extractions are soothing.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear, therefore, if the grain is in the ear, then the surgeon should use the first condyles for exsternum, and ample the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let there be scarring on the same ear or the eye.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps for this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	And if it does not jump, then take many piercings according to the length of your nail, and sharpen them a little at the fire; and put the forceps on one side of the ear, and pull out through the other part, and make one more hole on the hole that is in the ear; and continue making holes one after another until the eye is all out, and then it will all be out; and if you see, if it jumps, and take one of the ears, and the other one hold on fire as long as the lesser jump is hotter; then make another part of other jumps as long as the eye is all out, according to what we have said in the hole.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the tooth, if it is small in size, similar to a pea and resembles something else, it can be treated as we have described in the division; but if it is large in size, it can be felt, and it is the lighter thing to handle compared to the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of the ears' jewelry, if you treat it as we have described in the division and use distillations, but the treatment does not work, if you look at the ear to the sun: if there are no openings, if you gently pull out the pliers, and if there are, if you take the rope from here, it is the form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be tight and wide.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And bite the more subtle part of the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient endures, then all together will form a cain; do this often as much as you can.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not listen to it, then let them be placed in the corner of the cloth as I have said in the incision; and if they do not soil it as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have used in the decision of the verse, and you will find or mix your oils and medicines in the ear at this instrument; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear according to what you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	1. And let silver or gold be boiled in the wounds as many times as possible to draw out the poison; and use a proper distillation instrument made of silver, and if you see the rasor and envelop it at the end of the cotton; then let your oil or juice gush out, and whatever you see of your medicines in the cainne, and the cainne is in the ear; then dip the rasor into all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or comes from the ear; and it will feel cold to the patient, and so is the distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; and keep it not too cold, for the medicine will not be effective if it is too cold.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear's chill
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without having a cold in the ears; and this very same thing happens due to ear pain or a cut in the ear, and there is no sign of cold in the ear at all times, unless one can see; and never has there been a pus in the ear that was not visible.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If that which comes forward is not visible, it is a sign of recovery in many cases, and then you must put the ear with the cold in the sun; and look: if you see the ophthalmia apparent, then this is the form of the spume:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be and stretch it all over and under until it does not cause pain; if the inflammation is on the ear or the ear's side, if you have gentle forceps and a light cope, as long as the forceps are entirely covered.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the inflammation is on the edge of the ear, if you have a gentle rasp and a light cope, then you heat it slightly and place it on the ear's side.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the inflammation that the patient feels in his ear, gently rasp, and do not burn the ear's nerves; then put a tent according to the large puncture, and apply Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Do not cause any pain as much as the wound is sore, or take a tent and moisten it with hot rose water, and sprinkle some powdered vitrol; and if you see the ear covering, then roll up the tent and move another soft tent made of olive oil and wax, as long as the ear is sore. Then the doctor when he is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	2. And if the blood comes out, then dip a sponge and wet it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	The first sentence to translate is "Or cautere de feu comande
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	When the cautery is not done, if the cauterization of the subtle curved cauterizing iron is made, and the cauterizer after the incision does not cause any harm; and they are often repaired, with nothing to deter them from their roots; and when those roots are burned by fire, they are dead and do not return.
de la gresle	of the grit
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, papers come from the hairs things that seem gritty in their form and hardness, and for this it is called "snow" or "grandine", and it is an assembly of large moisture in the paper on both sides; the treatment is as follows: first, if the snow is silent on one side and the other, it is a light thing to know; then make it wide, then scrape off each part lightly, then take tweezers, and close.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	1. If you do not perceive a piece of paper with your hand, it does not matter if it hurts; and if the wound is large, if it assembles into a stitch, and the cure as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, if it does not make any force, because the restoration of the other parts is enough.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	2. If the snow is descending towards the earhole of the ear, if reversed, and the snow is held with forceps, and it presses from both sides; and if the paper is moved away by incision, it does not hurt; and when the snow is pressed, if the salty oil is leaked, and the wound is cured as much as the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is obtained by tearing paper into thin strips, and this is done more often as children grow older, and it causes pain to their hair, and they come to the catharre in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears are on their hair; and because they sleep with their faces down, and they sleep on their pillows that are damp from the moisture that the oil spreads over them.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your hand on your head and feel the exinach inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	1. And the manner of the cautery is that the patient places his head in your hand; then take a cloth from linen, and make a tent according to the quantity contained in each part, then place it on top; and press with your two hands on both sides, so that the cautery is assembled in the circle; then make a mucous environment of the moisture at the anus, trenchant a large fissure, not larger than the wound you make at the gash of the vein; and make the skin thick enough that you can see the cautery; and in other positions, the cautery comes out of the fissure, according to the shape of a piece of greasy white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	1. Remove the thorn from all pieces of sheet hanging between your two cheeks, and turn your hand to the right and left as much as it is possible; and make sure you do not push in the furrow, that you do not go to all the stomach, that you do not squeeze.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	2. If the thorn does not open at the beginning of the furrow, then lightly open it as much as it appears; then remove it as we have said, and wet the sheet in the water and in the oil, and put it on the cheek, and press gently.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	3. And if such men who have hairy scalps put on oil to corrupt the moisture that is dried.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure, as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient comes to the aid of an abscess, if the doctor uses cleansing ointments as long as he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the papers' hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers grow hairs other than their nature, and are awakened, if they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as tears and mollifications of the paper and albugine, as long as it is caused by the destruction of the hairs; and the cure is done in four ways: either by burning together with fire, or by medicine according to what is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and is made by cutting and stitching or by needles, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient's shoulder in your hand, then turn the paper of the oil to your left hand; if it is converted, it is well; if not, then insert an awl into all the threads of the filament; and let the margin of the paper or the hair that grows from these hairs be on the left side of the paper, and turn the filament to the right at the paper; then cut off the part of the paper, the hairs adjusted, throughout the entire circumference, from the largest to the smallest; then pull out the filament, and put a small tent of cloth and drapery on the paper, then sew a figure on the paper according to the quantity that you see rising the paper that is marked with dots; and it will be necessary that the figure is according to the amount that you see rising the paper that is marked with dots.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If a part of the body that is skilled at handling paper does not bear much weight, then cut out all the lines you have written, and start with large, firm scars just a little bit; and one of the furnaces near the natural hair growth in length, then burn the root at one of the two angles, then scrape it off completely; then assemble the two lips together with a sewing needle at every thread of fine wool, and draw out the sand, and make the superfluity of threads from the two corners of anything glutinous, if you see this done; and if not, then leave the stitching and the threads just until three or four; then cure the wound with the stitching of things that are dried and constricted, because the paper relaxes under the pain of the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is rotten (as they say the ancients), and it is overwhelmed with fear; and if another way: and if you see the paper of a figure that is as such as the fur of a mouse, according to the form that is here: then cut out all the lines you have written, and start with large, firm scars just a little bit; and one of the furnaces near the natural hair growth in length, then burn the root at one of the two angles, then scrape it off completely; then assemble the two lips together with a sewing needle at every thread of fine wool, and draw out the sand, and make the superfluity of threads from the two corners of anything glutinous, if you see this done; and if not, then leave the stitching and the threads just until three or four; then cure the wound with the stitching of things that are dried and constricted, because the paper relaxes under the pain of the wound and its assembly, but the stitching is rotten (as they say the ancients), and it is overwhelmed with fear.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then comes the one who surpasses with equal strength according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the nails, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle or a thread, and draw it out; and take another thread of about the same length as the large one, and the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your two hands; then gently press with your hand, and gently stitch all the leather where you have sewn, as we have experienced, then assemble the lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healthy; and when the suture comes to your incision, if the pain and swelling are alleviated; and never has there been that the hair of the paper has turned: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The patient is treated for rabies if it follows this form: and you convert the paper and make it according to what I have said, and then make the cords as in the art, and they are tied subtly as long as the paper and the large knot is; and cope as the heads of the parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly under that which overlies the paper of the oil, and draw the cords from the two parts formed; and leave no others, and the leather that is stretched will die and turn black and rot, as long as it hangs on it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the wound has some strength, then treat as soon as possible; and when the wound is healed, and the paper is lifted up, and no hair is left, and this is the form of the two cannulas you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The incisions are so small that you will need a fine needle, and a strand of fine silk; then assemble the ends and suture them gently, and make the length of the threads as long as possible; then cut a fine thread of silk and sew the other end; then place the patient's head on the table; and if the incisions are healed, it will be because the incisions were clean, so cut the needle at all the ends in the root of the hair that is untied, and make it firm in the paper as you drag the natural hair through; then pull out the hair until it is all in the chase, and cut in the chase the hair, if there are any two or three or more; then pull out your hand as soon as the hair comes out at all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	When the fur is shaved, it is treated and the hairs do not grow back with it, if you follow the instructions correctly at all times, as long as the fur does not grow back quickly and you see it through observation; then if you follow the instructions and the hair, and close the oil and leave it closed for 2-3 days, until the fur grows in its place and the tail emerges; and if the fur is short, if it is accompanied by one long hair of nature, and is separated with that which you leave, as long as it is elongated and then loosely tied.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the oil's fat
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or the oil comes in two ways: naturally and unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes by wounding, or cutting, or burning, and in similar ways.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of the oil is to cut it, and squeeze out the leaks, and put linen rags on it, and leave them until it is healthy; and you must only use things that dry and restrict in the cure of it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease becomes worse than the first; but it works things that are softening, like fenugreek; and the arose of aigue or altee and linseed seed are cooked, and dyaconens dyaquilon is not melted in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a tent, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are if you guard that it does not sound like according to the form it was before; and these opinions that we have said are none other than advices for this disease, that it does not relapse according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the char that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is called "acaratia" truly is called "acaratia", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounding and burning and cauterization and things similar; and the view of the patient in the mirror is that if you take an awl, if it has two threads, and the char in the mirror, and you feel the opposite arm as much as the other, so that the threads come into the head of the char; then the char is at the end of all the awl, and the copula is in the large spatule.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the cut is not in line, it does not matter; if it is, then take the razor and put it on the paper, turn the paper, and make as many cuts as the paper can hold; and let the angles of the two incisions that you made be as sharp as the letter "I" is not "G", then cut the excess parts according to the amount of your razor's edge, which is as fine as a linen thread; then apply the remedies we have mentioned for softening and bandages, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	When the disease comes from frostbite or frostbite or cauterization, if it comes that you make a simple incision under the hair of the papers, and according to what is here before; then between the two legs of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the form of the disease, because it is of different shapes, and the skilled masters arrange everything according to what can be returned to its natural shape; and the patient themselves, according to what they need from incision and amputations in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	I should have said "should" instead of "shouldn't" in the original sentence. Here
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this cauterization comes to the hands of women in a certain way that the paper is dipped in white oil, and cannot move or perform its natural acts, then it comes that you cut the point of a razor with the paper, and lift it on top; and the pincers, as long as you touch what is in the subtle spumona, which is neither too much nor too thin, so that the patient does not suffer from the spumona too much nor the oil becoming watery; and your incision, which you scrape of that assembled one, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and it becomes healthy all assembled, and never in the acidic cold water, and the levain d'aigue douce, and the coliere; then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil fine powdered wool in abundance of ointment; and afterwards use the cold and other things as long as it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the finger of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways in which the finger is: it is nervous and resembles I hard wax, and another that is not nervous but resembles dry moist clay when touched with iron and heated with tongs, if it does not; and both resemble towards the great fear, and grow little by little as it covers all the eye and all the light and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision if it is that the surgeon puts his head in the wound, then he operates on the nails; and gently take the paper with your hand, then take a small tweezer and the finger at the end; then take a needle, and put the horsehair, or the wool, or the beef, and the strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and the thread enters the finger, and pierces all the needle, and tie the finger with a thread and set it at the end, and scrape all the hair that is around the finger which has the prunele and the silk at the chief, then cut off the remaining in the root of the larmier at all the subtle spatumile with small forces, and leave the natural or larmier char, so that by the incision does not come the tears of the custom; and never has the finger stayed in the wound only, and through, as we have said; then it is scratched on all the spatumile so that the form is like this:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep the spatula from touching the charred skin and breaking it, and that the pruning tool is not perceived; and after the incision, a little oil is poured into the hole, and a piece of lint is laid, and left until the next day; then the care for what needs to be done until it is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you do not push the needle, and the ungues cannot enter, this appearance of nail medicines is often cured; and I have seen many times in division, and if you see it coated, then use oil lightly on the spatula according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	1. And cut the nail subtly, and if you see that it does not harden and the reason is pressing, then distill from your mouth the oil made of lavender with a bitter taste and a reddish color, and it stings the oil until it becomes like the other day; then continue the other pricking according to this same work, as long as it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. If nothing is against you in the oil, as with an abscess, then the milk, and first cure the abscess as soon as it is healthy, then continue the pricking as before, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the flesh of the arm appears in the oil at night due to great strain, and a part of it is not completely consumed, but only a portion, where tears do not come; then distills into the oil that is burning red, which is made from litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the wood that was cut down by the prunella
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And some men cut wood that has never been cut before, and prunes the prune trees and rolls up the papers and ties them with twine, and it looks like a rose of balauste; and the oil if it is that the malaides puts his hand in the sun, then he cuts the oils, and takes all that char as convenient for this, and supports it with the force; then cut the first char, and go all the way to the raseur just at the end, and keep that oil away from the ovraige; and so is the incision of the spatumile that we said in the incision of the ungle and small forces of coi on oste lou sebel, if com li forme après cest chapistre lou demostre; and when the incision is done and takes all the char, then use the oil of seil broiet or you distill coliere rouge and medicines corrosives, and put on the oil defuer coton with abin d’uef, if qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; and if it does not require anything, and the without chaus te sormonte, and you doubt aposteme chaut, if leaves the oil and cures aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; then return to your ovraige as it is healthy, and then make many chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you apply the cure to every weak point of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in fire; and do not force your hand into any of these fires until you see that the other member is affected by that fire.
des voines des eulz	of veins of hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Several veins are red that are covered with oil, and they touch the eye's surface and weaken the oil for all time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the first thing you should look at is the oil, and if it is red, it is false, and there is no other disease than this one; therefore, in this way: instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, then stretch those veins all over according to your wisdom, and make them subtle according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let it be known that one must cut through the flesh according to this form in degrees of one hand:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then use your force to remove those oils subtly, and let the blood flow afterward as much as you can remove the oils; and be careful not to cut the skin with sharp points of scissors, and do this work before midday in the sun, and be diligent in your work so that you do not miss any oils; and when you have finished, distill the oil into a green and red pot to corrupt what is left.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot cut through all of it in that hour, make a plaster with the pain-relieving oil and leave some parts until the pain is relieved and the swelling is reduced, then resume according to this method as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	If the fistula is called "arissati", then you should clean it by fire cautery and with burning medicine as I have previously stated, and if it is not healed, then you must cut it along the aposteme, and remove all the moisture that is in it, until the os is discovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the os is discovered, and you see the corruption and darkness, if all the instruments of this kind are made of it, then it is called "spry chief", and should be made firm in the chief, and should be pointed like a lime, as it is in its present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	1. And place the head of the corrupted bone on your palm, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand firmly until you feel that corruption is removed; and do this as many times as necessary, then restore the bone with medicinal exfoliants.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	1. If the bone is hard and charred, and the belly of the bowel is hard, and it remains so for forty days, and it does not regenerate or become infected, and no complications arise, you should suspect that it is healthy; if not, there is no other option but to return the fistula to its place according to this form: and if you dig into the bone twice with a chisel and with medicinal abrasives, and if it reveals itself as such when you open it according to this form, and the head of the chisel is at an angle of three degrees, and the edge should be thin enough to cut through the flesh as you see, and that is how you should do it.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place the handle of the scalpel on your thumb, and slightly move your hand away from the bone, then turn the entire forearm until it pierces the bone and feels the pain as if you are holding your hand on your neck; and then restore the dry medicine leg as I have shown you, and when the child is grown and hardened by the medicine, if the matter is in the neck, then it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the end of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound is fully open and there is no obstruction in the bladder, and it does not cause any pain or discomfort, then you must apply the salve to the wound; then put on the ventouses or haterel without hurting by being too thin, then put it on the oil I have made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the oil, and apply it to the wounds and the drapelz; if the drapelz are too moist, double each by IV, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount that the patient has used; then strain the salve into hard bendals, and resume the ventouses without hurting by being thin; then remove the ventouses and leave the oil drawn out overnight and morning, and if it is soft, it is good; but if not, then after the day and night, remove the ointment and see if the wound is healed, it is good; if not, then repeat the application and the ointment and the ventouses as long as it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	A sudden pulling or tearing of the eyeball
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a sudden disruption occurs in the eyeball, it opens and reveals paper like strands, as fine as resin grains; therefore, close your eyes and take hold of the eye socket, making a cut at the root of the part that is most affected by the injury, then make another cut where there is a double filament; and perceive, leave the first cut according to its position; then cut the double filament and take out a part of the eyeball, press it well, then remove the needle and put some ointment on the wound in abundance; and leave it until the threads are no longer attached to the eyeball, and cure the wound with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never leave a wound unattended by the eyeball, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs grow long and even, if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil's gum
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not other than a gum that is assembled in the oil, appearing as a wet descent, and it is not wet; and the manner of appearance of the wound if you make the patient sit upright and straight, then take the chief between your hands of II parts, and pull it as you see the gum coming to the eye of your hairs; then it is like a fish, and does not descend and does not become disentangled, and you see the malaides things as they were; and if it does not descend, say that it is wet, and if the descent of the gum is not apparent as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you place the patient's arm in your hands, then take a soft spatula and make a cut along the corneal edge as far as the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the corneal ring, until the bow is out; and when it is out, let it drip into the cold, warm water mixed with honey, or cold and fenugreek is boiled and honey, then it should be cured by other means as long as it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oils of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the appearances of the oils in the division, and when it is necessary to perceive; if according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	1. It is necessary that you hold the patient's hand in front of your face, with the light of the sun, and the smooth and tight oil; then place the paper of the oil on your left hand, so that the hairs are on the right side, or on your right hand, the hairs are on the left side; then take in your right hand, with the hairs on the right side, the instrument called "almagda"; then place the tip of the instrument's point at the coronet through the largest part of the oil in the bladder of the oil in the smallest part; then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and twist your hand until it pierces the bladder of the oil, and feel that almagda viegne to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the almagda hole is at the end of the measure of the espaice which is on the prunele at the end of the nose; and this is the coronet of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornered skin, and then place the instrument where it is, then press it with force through one hole after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the patient feels dizzy now, if they see the surgeon before them and the instrument in their hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, and if the patient feels dizzy again, open the second vein, take the forceps with the instrument, and when it is firmly held and does not move, gently twist your hand around the handle several times; then remove a piece of wool from the end of the candle, and pour the oil into it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then pour the oil into the wounds or soft tissue, and mix it with healthy oil and a little urine, and apply it with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our kin, put on shoes with many buttons.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the oil cannot enter through the hair because it is too hard, because there are too many men with very hard hair, then you must use the instrument called "alberit," which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce only the conjunctive, and do not pull too hard, but make a small incision, then bore further, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, the patient should lie down on his back in the dark room; and he should be given light foods, and not move his head to the right or left, and keep it according to its natural position; then he should lie down in this house, look at things, and make sure nothing is seen, and then put the bandage on after the ninth day; but it is necessary that you do this during the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you put the bandage on, because the eye swells rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When the patient feels pain, move the oil in front of the seventh day, and address the one who calms the pain; and when it is pacified, remove the eye and put it in your face to cover any joint, and remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then, leave the house little by little, and become one's own disciple; and be aware that no students should intermingle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Then some came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in some ways it was a maggot perception, but we have never seen one on our land, nor have we ever heard of it in old books; and by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of the mustache, because those who do not know them by sight; and they are truly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And be the head of this very subtlety, and the tail in third angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the cheek and the nose.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No time are born or grown without cheeks, and if there are any that seem to have scorpions at the mouth of the face; and if they have an enhanced cheek with a different color, and if it has a cheek with a natural color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that of these cheeks which are not enhanced, and do not have an enhanced cheek, it is necessary that you put the mustache between your hands before the sun; and work on the nostrils, and moisten the snout with those cheeks, and pull them out; so that you can hold it steady at the subtle tip of a spatula, as long as you see that this cheek is all grown.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If there is nothing else that can be done, if you examine all the surgical instruments lightly and subtly, without causing any harm; and if it does not overwhelm you, or cause an abscess, if it is a malignant one, then quickly cauterize it as much as possible until it is not inflamed and all the bones are charred, then cool it with water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If you operate, and moisture comes to the palace, which is healthy; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, which is charred in the bone of the limb, or the instruments cannot be cut: therefore it is necessary that you tie a thread around the end of the linen, which is large enough for your hands, and it must be between every nail and the docket or less; and put the sharp edge of the other end of the mallet in the child's mouth, and let it odor until it comes out through the nose; and often make the child perform this exercise, and it is a light thing for those who see it; then hold the first finger that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other finger that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and follow it after the other.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	1. Do as much as you can see that the child has corrupted the char, then take the boy's penis, clean the wound, and wipe the boy's penis with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the urethra as before; do this 3 to 4 times, until the ointment corrodes all that is left of the char; then put a piece of cork in the urethra for as long as it is healthy, and if you have experience with drying herbs, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the child's penis, or when you distill the oils and medicines or the urine:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a candelabrum, and it is led thus; and if you see, if a candle is closed, and it is the extinguishers plain for expelling the fire; and it has an arm to hold the head when one heats the oil or no liquid.
de la char sor le neis	and of the sword when the need arises.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times it is seen at the head of a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large, until it is seen as something to be looked at; and for this it is necessary to cut at the beginning, and all the bone, then put the cautery or the hot medicine; and if it is delayed as long as it is large, if it is hard, of dark color, poor sense: if it does not touch any iron because it is enchanted, since when one touches it never, if evil comes to the patient; and if the apostemas are touched, not of dark color, and you see that it can be covered, if the patient is empty and the apostema is touched without pain, and cure the patient of things that are dry and restricting.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the joint is cut and bruised
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is said that when a solution for continuation comes from one of these cartilages, it does not last long, and this is true in no man's land.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore to do this if no one has come beforehand; and then look at whether the wound is fresh at all its base; and then treat it with a bandage, as soon as it is safe; and if the lips are already swollen on both sides, then remove all the parts of them that are sick, and then assemble the lips with a bandage, and extract, and powder with dragon's blood powder, and burn incense; and put on the powder a piece of an emplaustre of some other emplauster, and leave it as long as it is dry, then treat the ointment as soon as it is safe.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	1. The method of sewing is as follows: whether you use needles or thread, as we have mentioned in the abdominal stitching; or by hand, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	2. of lip sutures
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	3. The lips are often toughened by sutures, resembling grains of sand, and becoming smaller and larger; therefore, it is necessary to turn the lips, and each time you open a wound, you should use forceps and hold them in each part; then use the leech after incising with vitrol, as long as the sores are not inflamed; and then remove the leech, and cure the wound with dry things as long as it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	Of the thigh of the knee
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the thigh of the knee has been burned, which they call "albulus"; if you can hold it with your nails, and the root with the foot, and let go of the vein or the sinus; then put on vitriol powder or other restraining and desiccant powders; and if the thigh returns after the incision, and many times it happens, if the root is second time, and cauterized; if it does not return soon after the cauterization; and these are the forms of the estrumens with the copper.
des sordens	of the scars
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	1. No times are gathered at the jaws, jaws between the cheeks, ulcers that are harsh and sharp; and no times is the black and yellow and pointed tooth, until corruption comes to the cheek, and it becomes the blackened tooth; if you come to place the mouth between your hands, and its chips are in your holy hand, and open the jaws or ulcers as long as there is nothing more; and then I make black and green, and yellow and other stains, as they are turned; and if this is in the first reason, it is good; but if not, then renew the second day and the tooth, as you have everything turned; and you should know that the teeth have different forms of gums to laugh, according to what the tooth demonstrates, because the raser that rubs the teeth has other shapes than those that are shown between the teeth; and these forms and others are with you visible.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the patient's pain that you delay treating as much as possible and as quickly as you can, because it should not be otherwise; for it is a substance of high value therefore there is no excuse for neglecting it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is confined to bed, if you are certain that they have pain, then.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the patient's pain has passed, and it is necessary to keep the patient warm and give them to drink; and until the patient is completely recovered, for these are the most dangerous times; and when you are certain that the patient has pain, if you must scratch the skin of the entire body, then first do it gently at all points; then pull out the hairs with your nails; and place the patient's head between your knees and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth sharply with forceps, and if it does not break, then take none of these hooks and gently pull out from each side, and move it as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	If the teeth are felt and pulled out, then it is necessary to fill them with cloth, wherever there are holes; and if the extraction is done subtly with hooks, it will not break the tooth; and it is wise to overturn the gum for cleaning the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you should be very careful not to break it, and there will remain a part, and the patient suffers from the malice of the root, greater pains in the first place.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	1. And you should wear this to avoid causing pain like those who ignore health, who through their haste and their audacity break the charm never, and do not cause pain to anyone that we have known; but they bring it once by the agony of this great disease from its roots that they do not want, or from the bone that they break, just as often as we have wanted; and when it is cold, if you wash the skin with wine or vinegar and salt; and if they dislocate and come out, which often happens, if you use the skin of vitriol, and if it does not work, if it cauterizes.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the tooth-grinders, whether they are still or not, are long and wide at the tips and large in size, and they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they be of large members if they do not break when pulled out, and they be well-made iron, and they be teeth to hold tightly.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root of the tooth becomes loose, if it comes to pass that you put your thumb on the gum for an hour or more.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the root is smooth, if it remains so, you pull out the points called "algefris," of which the heads appear to be like a beard; and they be made thus also like a wedge and that is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out through all these pricks, then it comes that you dig out the whole of the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a type of tweezer, and its form is like this:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is very thick and does not break the skin, and the root jumps through this, it is good; but if not, then use all the forceps, and the forms come after like this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help with this instrument that has two prongs, its form is like this:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And of other forceps that are before in the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like large thorns, its form is like this:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	1. And so it is that the joint will not break, and the tools are sharp; and others are made of denser materials; and the masters are skilled in using their own instruments according to what they observe in their patients' conditions, because they have diseases that are not taught by the diversity of instruments used by different times, or break due to other bones, or cause other parts to fracture, if they seek estruments that are suitable for the joints I mentioned, and guide you with gestures, as shown in the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	2. And let them be large and well-grasped to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and support it; then restore the leu of the medicines suitable for this, and if there is inflammation in the bone, and it is small, then use all of this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears that does not fit with the natural corporeal form, and its shape is deformed, and at the same time in women, if it is necessary to remove it after the tooth, and it is not true that it is there, and it cannot be soaked or limed: therefore the root; and if it is found with the tooth, if this instrument whose form is shown here is taken, and it resembles a small beak, and is made of iron very sharp:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the force is little by little with the hands years due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be limed, then the liming of a part of the liming as shown here is the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	1. And it comes as if the lime is made like the goggles; and in the lime the beak is very small and small in the hands, so that it does not move at all until it chicks; then the flatness at the end has no rasping, and the tongue is too sharp and it bends the tongue, if it manages to emasculate as much as it can be equal, so that it does not bend the tongue and does not corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	2. When the beak is dislocated.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	3. When the beak is dislocated in front by pressure or by blow, and the patient cannot press on it as he wants to, and you should treat him with restraining medicines, and it does not work; if it is restrained by a golden thread, because the silver threads become green and slimy, but the gold does not move at all; and if the thread is too thick or too thin, according to the quantity of the spice between the teeth; and if you see the teeth, take a golden thread and a silver thread double between the healthy teeth, then put the threads between the diseased teeth, as long as you see sagacity in the healthy tooth; then resume the covering on the part where you started, and gently and wisely stretch your hand, so that it does not move at all; and if your finger is at the root of the tooth, so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then, put the teeth into the bone, assemble them, and re-insert them between the healthy teeth, and place it so that it does not chip the tongue; then, leave it as tight as possible and let it stay, or if it comes out, if the thread snaps, then the other thread will be pulled; if it stays and holds all its tension, and is the form of the teeth and the shape of the incisors of the second teeth and the second premolars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is reset in its place, it must be done carefully, as we have said; and it should not be forced if it is not sharp and painful, and never made to look like a bone tooth of a mare, and it is placed on the gum where it was deformed, and it is tightened as we have said, and it should not be forced, and held in place:
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Of the copper wire of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never is a wire that comes out of the tongue or nature, that one makes in it; or by accident of wound; and the ovraiges are such that you make the mouth of the midwife, and it has its head in your hand, and relaxes the tongue; then cope the nervous wires that are large, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it becomes hard or out, and this is due to wounding, if the tooth bites it and cope large, the other one; and keep that the fever does not become too much, for the artery that is out; and when you have done, if the tongue is red and sore, or cold, then put back in its place a tent of linen; and the midwife will tease the patient every night, that the one who uses it can soothe.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the dislocation occurs, if the patient does not immediately grasp the leg with vitriol, and if it is not possible to cauterize at the slow cauterization point that is suitable for this, then the other treatment begins as soon as it is safe.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that it is red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, and it is not touched, because it is a gangrene; and if it is declining into a bladder, and it is moist, and the wound is oozing, and it is cleaned with a subtle sponge, and the discharge is from one side and another; and if it is not possible to reach your goal, then immediately grasp it with vitriol as soon as it is inflamed, and return to your goal as soon as you have dealt with everything; then lift the leg of silk and thread, and the other treatments as soon as it is safe.
des apostemes de la gorge	gums of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Never comes the gums of the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "amandines". When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, then keep them: if they are hard and small in size and color, and not sharp like iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, and not sharp like iron, then it is due to blood; but it will remain so until it is dead, and then you will take it out; and if it is of a watery color and the root is subtle, and you have prepared the instrument with care, but first look to see if the gums are calmed and settled.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, and his head be in your hand, and he opens the mouth and the tongue between his hands, and presses the langue so tight to all the instrument, of whatever it may be, whether silver or gold: and it is as if some counterweights.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue so tight to all this instrument, and see the incision, if you take the icepick and the needle in the hare, and draw it as far as you can; and take no other thing with you, then the copes of the instrument, of whatever it may be, that seems like forces; and all the chief are crossed, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if it is sharp, then the form is like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And so, one part should be cut and the other named; and when you cut one of the hairs, cut the other in the same manner, and after making the incision, warm the sharp blade with hot water, and make it sharp and smooth, and if the blood comes out, if the blade is heated, or if burns from pomegranate peels are cooled, or if fuelled mirte, and similar things, as long as they are not bleeding; then the cure is done when it is healthy; and no other styphlus ever appears in the mouth except the two hairs of the II amandres, if they are cut like the II amandres.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess in her throat that was causing pain, which is known as an "aposteme of little sensation"; she had almost completely closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe out through the clogged passageway, and could not drink or eat, and died if she lingered for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had been opened twice by the two holes.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I thought to cut the abscess open, and found a great portion of bowels inside; then I cut into another opening, and opened the woman's mouth and pressed on her tongue; after cutting the abscess in these places, and taking out a piece, there was only a little blood; and then she was able to swallow water and wine, and began to drink more and more, and the abscess continued to grow larger, filling the part I had cut; the abscess finally burst open, and filled the hole that I had made, so that it grew very large; then I cauterized the abscess in the throat: afterwards she recovered, and I left these parts, and only God knows what happened after me.
de l’uve	Of the urethra
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the urine flows into the urethra, and it is narrow and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is very large and rounded, it is called "urethra".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, you see that the incisions are calmed and subtle, and if you touch it, it is suitable; and the one that is rounded and not long is assembled and not far; and it is bloody or has a fuscous color or black, and if you expel the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For it poses great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, as I have said, to follow the manner I described, with regard to the patient's belly and length, that you place the midwife before the sun, and press the tongue onto the instrument we made note of earlier; then cut the umbilicus, and draw it out, and sew it in two segments as I mentioned in the incision of the two umbilical cords.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut too much beyond the natural end, for if you do, it will cause strain on your voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two umbilical cords, and cure it as soon as it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	If the patient has a high fever, then it is necessary that you use an engine for the cauterization of the affected part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cauterization is to make it hot and dry.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the patient puts his head in your hand and then presses his tongue on the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and confines it with hot, dry fire, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and then uses the edge of this instrument, its form is:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has a lock of hair or puts medicine in his mouth, as one does with a tooth, and places the instrument at all the medicine on the eyeball; and the patient is gasping for air, if the saliva and mucus are coming from his mouth due to the medicine given, if it does not reach the throat and neck, then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the eyeball, as much as you can see the narcissism and the pain of the medicine is calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and pull the instrument through all the cotton in the tail of the cord, as much as the cotton dries on the eyeball; and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wait after four or five hours or five days, and if you have the skill to re-cauterize the medicine, if it resumes, and after cauterizing the discharge around the eyeball, wrap it in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and use gargles as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision, only burning; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take mustard, soap, and sage, chamomile, thyme, and rosemary, and all or none of them in one pot, and mix, and boil; and it can be well glued with strong earth, and the pot should have the comb according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it can be of silver or gold, and one of the heads is put into the patient's mouth as long as the vapor rises through the urethra, until the urethra is hardened; afterwards, it resumes often, until the urethra is dry, and make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of gangrene, because many things come; and do not make this too early in the decline of gangrene.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a needle and sew the corner of the eye with a thread, if the eye does not have too much inflammation; for the thread does not harm the eyeball, and it is a good cure in assembly salute.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened in the throat, or with a bone of fish, or nothing at all; if it comes then that you see what you need to see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and if you do not open it and it is stuck in the throat, then it is necessary to make the patient vomit unless the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it is made clear by vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of gauze, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and then put it on the sponge and then glutinate; and when it comes to the mouth, if it slips, and then pull it out; and if it does not come out of what we have said, then take the instrument of punch according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the strap be placed on the head if it can more gently enter the mouth, and the head be raised up; and watch that you do not touch the epigastrium, that all may not vie, nor the bone be bent; and it is best that the patient and the instrument be held, because it is most suitable or the thing is there; if it is held, or it is drawn further along the entire instrument evenly, as far as it goes.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat's loose skin
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never has medicine been used on loose skin, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and if it does not profit, then look at the mouth of the patient's face towards the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the shoulder, if the bone is all in one piece, or if it has thin hairs that are worth nothing in this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it is not worth anything, then take a hair from the head of a woman, and tie it around the neck of the patient, and then pull or cut off the hair, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And the patient's scalp is sweating all the time.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full advantage of the cool sweat on your face, and open your mouth, and feel the saliva enter your throat often; and if the shoulder feels hot, then do this.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If the patient does not understand as we have said, if the cauterizer smokes a lot of asafetida, with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, as it will feel better.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of the fumigation if you prefer to use or if there are charcoal pieces, and it is the head covered with a cloth in the environment, and in the other part, the head of the instrument; then do your fumigation, and the cauterizer puts the tip of the snake's tail in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not enter, but goes to the throat; and the throat will now hurt, and if it hurts again, do the fumigation many times; and let the cauterizer be thirsty, and drink salty and acidic things, and do not drink lemon water; and then do your work as it was done by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument used to treat the wound, if it is, when it can be seen, resembles tinea corbicularis with sharp points that can enter the mouth; it looks like a beak of a surgeon, and has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it touches, it cannot let go; and this is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of the sutures
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The appearances of the sutures are, according to which memory comes after another in this book, and they vary in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is in its own appearance similar, and for that it is moist.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is if the limbs are lying down or at rest.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the head of the chief is different from that of the foundation, and the head of the lower limb is different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if one cannot perceive the head, as long as the bow is dead according to its completion; and if there are such cases where it must be perceived when it is believed, and they do not die until their completion, then like those that are difficult to reach in joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when the head comes from difficult joints, and it is left as long as it is dry, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is due to contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	For the abscess cure, if it is located on the principal limb, and you delay the puncture as long as possible before it bursts, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is located in the foundation, and you do not stop until it bursts, then it will be like a digestion completed in vain, just like the one that is located in the foundation, which will not close, and will become a fistula; and it cannot heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	It is necessary that you clean the wound of the abscess puncture that has burst according to the completion of the accommodation, and it is when the pain is subsided, the decrease in fever, the alleviation of pain and bleeding, and the debate and aguement of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you sew the puncture or more dependent on the abscess, and where it was opened; and it should be the puncture long enough for the accommodation, and if the aperture is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all of them equal or without cicatrix.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that are pricked, according to the pain of the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is formed in the member, if it is painful, then you should leave the puncture until it is confirmed to be well digested, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you prick it in this way, if the blood comes out of it, and it is painful to look at, and by chance hardens the lips and makes them crooked; and then endurances the face.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no abscess that is felt according to the pain of the member, then it should be left according to the size of the blood.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	The text is asking the reader to carefully and accurately remove small buttons, buttons, and numerous stitches according to the size of the button; and if there are such buttons or stitches that are too large, they should be cut off. When it becomes as soft as I am, and is worn out, it is necessary to make them in the same way as bubbles: and if there are such ones that are cut at three angles, and if there are such ones that are cut like the thorn of a rose, like buttons of anger; and if there are such ones that are made into a larger size, and other sizes and appearance are also cut.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	The first line of the text translates to: "Those who lack a head, just like an abscess on the surface, it is necessary that you open it gradually; and when the abscess is large, and the pus is thick, and you open it, unless you drain all the pus in that hour, but only a part of it, then the abscess closes up to the other side, then you do not touch anything else; you do this many times, as long as the pus is all gone; at the same time, if the patient is weak in virtue, or a woman carries, or children are small, or old people are feeble.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expectoration there is no time with the issue of the bowel, that by chance dies the patient, and you do not blame yourself.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you perceive your abscess, if the wound is large, look at whether the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat one, if you can sew it with linen or cotton; and if it is large abscesses, and they have a lot of pus, if you can sew each one in separate pieces so that one against the other; and if you have cut a part of leather in the abscess, and you have shaved it off, then cover it with fine cloth or ragging of linen threads, and tie it to the bone and the cure of ointment as soon as it is healthy. Then the bone, and the care of ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the evacuation of blood comes to your vein, if it is cold and wet, and the arm hangs down, and you gently put it on the bed many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the evacuation of blood persists, if it is governed and treated, and the powders I mentioned in my hands are in this book, and if you have pain, and the wound is nervous, then you should put on warm clothes and moisten your skin with wine and olive oil; and if this is the case, and the wound is charred, then you should put on cold water and olive oil, or wine and oil, as soon as possible, according to what we have said; and then close the wound and dress it, according to what is necessary.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	This comes when you must understand completely in the treatments of abscesses: or you have said what one must do before the treatments of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of sore
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When the head of the shoulder comes to many abscesses, and they are like ours, as if the thread of a grapevine, and there are some that seem like this.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	It has some that are fat and similar to those that have moisture, and if they are like this which are hard and rough in the surgeon's hands, and it does not have doubt, it will not be reversed.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the measurements of the size if it is that you prove to all the instruments that are called "entromising," by which form comes after, what thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they make it longer by adding more.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is visible, it burns without leaving the hair that contains it, because it returns as soon as it is left alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, use linen and poultice, and leave the wound, and what you cut off, and follow what you have done the next day; and what you have cut off will be as good as before.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then, the thread resumes again, as before, on the second day, and the wound, as long as you see that it does not become worse at night; then treat the wound with an ointment suitable for the occasion, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds fat, and it grows in this form, and the pus comes out, and you stretch your fingers, and scrape off all parts, and apply all your care to draw out the pus or it will become harder; and if the artery is opposite, I do as I have said afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And if the abscess is large, and it is cut and cured as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And it measures the incision for the abscess and the wound, if it is more flexible, because there is less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these abscesses or wounds there is no moisture, and these were from the sharp teeth of an old woman; and I found the abscess as a rough, sharp, and blunt piercing, which could not be cut; and if none was made, it would have been as good as a piercing.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses or wounds, the opening should be as far down as possible towards the root of the ear, to open the bowels; and the treatment should be done as necessary.
des scrophules	The first sentence to translate is "des scrophules
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often, the wound of the abscess is at the collarbone, and the stitches come out, and the skin becomes inflamed, and never once do they go to another part or close, and they become infected, and one bone is connected to another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each dislocation is properly placed on its side, just like the wound and abscess of the shoulder, as we have said; and the appearances of these dislocations are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	It has tissues that contain moisture, and it has malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In the position that you see of good arrangement at the edge, and resembles the color of the strong arm, and quiet in every part and not like any other pain or artery or conduit, and not like any other; if it comes that you cut it with a knife, and burn in every part, and are the lips of the knee as the bones, if you have the skill, as we have said in apostles, and the scar is small and few, and you are sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and are not like the salt that the hands do not protect, that the eyes see too soon, that you do not;
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you prick the vein or artery, and it does not let you stop, then put vitrol beads or any powder that adheres to blood in the wound, and stretch the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed and the wound is soothed, and begins to ooze.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And if the wound is not cleaned, then return to your vein as soon as you can; then wait for your doctor's indication if it does not show any small pustules, such as the cop and mund.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if the wound is a large pustule, then only cut out that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and leave it to dry without harm; then apply the wound plaster of soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat the wound.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you cover the entire wound, if you manage to bring together the two lips of the wound, and hold them now, then there will be no excess due to the size of the wound.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you understand how to cover the root of it, and dig further, and cut as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those wounds that have superfluity, perforate them or make them larger; and it is done as in the one mentioned, depending on the size, then apply dressings with ointment and similar things, if it prevents corruption from spreading; and when the wound is healed, if the cure of ointment causes charring, as long as it is healthy.
de squinance	Of the shoulder
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the shoulder's size; however, I have never seen anyone do it in our time, and this is the scripture of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with dislocation, it is necessary that the shoulder wound called "epiglottis" be avoided; and none can help with this, because all wounds and the patient's pain are in those who have lost consciousness in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the other members.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat, it is necessary to close the epiglottis to avoid death that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	1. It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epigastric region, that we cut it in three or four circles or five small cuts passing through the two circles or according to the quantity of the cut, and not in the cartilage; and this is sufficient for the section of the epigastric region without causing pain, and the wounds are long enough to be stitched.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	2. And if the masters are poor, then it comes to pass that the gullet of the neck is extended all the way to the throat, and then cut as far as the chin; and avoid the veins of the face, if you see nothing, and then cut the flesh, as we have said; and is demonstrated by the section of the swelling of the chin that it would have been torn apart by the neck which is broken, and by the failure of the voice; and leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hour has passed since it was set, gather the two lips of the wound as much as possible, and touch all parts of the cartilage; then administer medicines that make the patient feel better, until they are healthy again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim does not do anything until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is near death, and the lack of air is fatal.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, it is recommended to operate on the epigastrium because the patient cannot breathe, and they are breathing through the wound, and it should be guarded against death; and that is why the ancients ordered the wound to remain over the bone as long as the malice of the disease had not passed, and it had passed after three days or four. And therefore, it was ordered to cut the wound and cure it, as soon as it was cured; and I will tell you what I see.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see that a maiden is hurting her throat, and she bites on the gauze, and parts of her fur are coming out; and I was called to cure her, and I found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discover the wound, and I find the blood that came out of it, and though she had no veins or it led further than just the throat, it was due to the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened to care for the wound and cure it as soon as she was healed; and she did not come back for the maiden until her voice was hoarse, and she returned later in her place; therefore I say that there is no pain in the epigastrium.
de la grosse gorge	Of the large mouth
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Hernias are called "hernia of the throat," and they are large hernias in a red color like a rash, and they are more common in women; and they occur in two ways: natural and accidental; or natural has no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is in two ways, of one being like fat bodies, and the other like hernias that come from the arteries; and if it hurts, and there is no need to fear more than a small incision, and the doctor and search for everything inside: if you also feel as fat as I am, and cannot find any void, if the cope, so as to open all your belly, if it has none; and then carefully cut it all, and cure as much as necessary, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	The first sentence to translate is
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of us, which I will mention all the appearances; and it comes that I make all the difference between newborn and born.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is chills and fever, as long as the ebullitions have passed and the food has been digested, therefore the fever and the chill subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the newborn there is no chill or fever or pain, and it contains sweat, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the baby's skin, and becomes like a rash, and turns large; and they are according to the two appearances, either gray or moist, and the color is so as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the newborn, that you examine and first look at all the instrument called "dislocating" according to what the form brings out or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	The manner of incising abscesses of the body is that you prick or make it wetter than the abscess you are opening, and turn your two points a little at a time until you see that the stitch has caught the keur, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the dislocating instrument, and hold tight while you jump.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	1. If moisture occurs, it depends on the color of the skin, just as with other abscesses; and if no swelling follows after the incision, it is fat, so make a cross, take tweezers, and scrape it lightly at each point and burn the wound with the nail; and if you cannot heal it in pieces, then heal it in sections as there will be nothing to suffer.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it does not heal, it returns to us many times; and if it consumes a pouch, and it does not grieve you, then use the wound with some corrosive powders, close the wound, and put soothing ointments on the abscess, and cure other abscesses as much as possible; and if it becomes large, then remove the edges of the wound and cure what causes inflammation.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	When the vein is battered and it is against you or otherwise if you haste and use the glass leu of vitriol, and leave it for II jors or III, as long as the wound pours blood, and rest the heat of the sanc; then return to the coper that it is needed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the hernia prolapses, and they are of three kinds: large and thick and small; and there are three kinds of them called "albaret", one called "breb", and there are also three kinds: great, thin, and small, to encircle the fistula apertures; they are like the beaks of birds that are counted by their tails, and they are of copper, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable than those that are gray, and they are less worn out of black to encircle the corbeurs of fistula; and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the largesce of the fistula.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the nails are of different appearances, as you see: large, medium, and small; and if the nails have III types of corneas; and if the nails have III types of corneas and are of III types; and if the nails have II types of corneas and are solely of I type and are of III types; and all these are necessary in their leu.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these are sharp, and such as do not cut more than one part, whereby the nose and the nerve are burned; and these intromitters are returned to forceps, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscess; and they are of III kinds: large, small, and middle, as you see; and none other is used but in the leu, like thighs, arms, hands, and fingers, and toes, and in similar parts; and no other instrument of another kind, resembling incisions of forceps, according to this form, is used, as long as the saccharum is not infused.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed on none of the times to the shoulder that it can withstand the pressure of the veins and the arteries, and never returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never have the cheeks of other men swelled when they come to be stretched, as if they were women's cheeks; and they become bloated and puffed up, and those who see them cure them, if it comes to follow this form of this line from .b. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scarify the fat, and use a medicinal wound dressing with char, then stitch the corners of the wound together as tightly as possible, and cure it as long as it is healthy; and if the cheeks are swollen and become inflamed due to its size, so that they look like women's cheeks if they were sewn together, and if one of them holds onto the other at the end of each, then that the smaller line contains the larger according to this form, from this line .b. to .g.; then scarify the leather between the two lips, and remove the fat, and treat what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the cure, as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not rest, or due to the decay of the smell, if you fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it as long as it drains and the grease, then cure it as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	The first sentence to translate is: "Car en l’ovraige de cest chap
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Car en l'ovraige de cest chapitre, il y a souvent une évacuation de sang lorsque on ouvre une vaisseau sanguin, et incise une abscèse, et traitre des plaies, et extraire des arrow, et coupe des pierres, et des choses similaires. Où il y a doute et peur, et de nombreuses mort
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Il est donc important que le docteur soit précautionneux lorsqu'il fait la réposition d'une dislocation de la poitrine ou de l'épaule, car il peut causer de graves dommages si il n'est pas effectué correctement.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Si toute la bouteille qui est en l'apostème est vuidie, il est recommandé d'utiliser une plaie de cuir pour enlever le reste du liquide et de laisser les cotonnes jusqu'à ce que la bouteille soit complètement saine.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	When the abscess resembles scabs, if it is as we have said in scales, and the wound bleeds, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the arrow is inserted, and the cloth is cut that is on it, if many times abscesses occur, and also there is pain in the vein and abscess; and if the physician knows when it is for the arrow, if the abscesses are long and deep; and when you feel it with your hands, if it feels tight; and when it is for the vein, if it is cut apart free; and it is madness to pull out this abscess, and at the same time when the bandages are loosened and the wounds are open and the mouth of others is full of blood, and it is large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to avoid the use of iron, and whoever is in charge should also avoid it, and in the one who has a wound made by the arrow, as much as possible, cut off the cloth that is long; then remove the arrow from the wound, as far as it is discovered; then take a needle and perforate the other side, and draw the arrow through the loops, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then point the bone that is between the two links of an introducer as much as it does not hurt when it is, and let the wound be closed; then apply the dressing that follows, as soon as the blood comes out; then treat this wound as it appears to be, and if the wound is through the vein, then you must take in your hand what you have of the wound from all the cloth, then pull out the needle from the hand that you hold with your hand, and perforate it, and if it has two threads, then draw it from the other side; then close the wound, as I have told you, or from one of the two parts of the two threads; and if you doubt that the threads do not come out, then take another needle at the end of all the threads of the first wound, and draw them through all the threads of the first wound, and tie the threads in four places; then close the wound as much as possible, then close the superfluity, then close the superfluous part and leave what is tied; then put on a soft cloth dipped in wine and oil, then apply dressings and ointments as soon as it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	1. And this happens more often with assistants and you must do it in all joints, and it is a great pain, and its color resembles the color of a wounded corpse, and it is in many positions that cause pain; and when it is stretched, it feels like pain in the chest, but not as severe as a wounded corpse, but rather a sharp pain; and it is silent in all parts, and does not move before or after, nor does it twist, and the one who is in the joints does not want to move by force: by chance, there is contraction; and he who is at the head or front, makes the skin wet with sweat.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is small, and it is held with nails, and the covering is at its root; and if it is large, and the flesh is burned and scorched, then the bone and assembly of the wound to the dressing, and the care is done as soon as it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	large tongs hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never occurs in the belly and does not affect any other part, and is a disease called "funge" due to its appearance of aus, and is located at the subtle root, and the head is large; and it has small and great throats; and I have seen one who had such a belly that it resembled funges more than anything else, and it had no difference, and were white, and had thin roots, and were cut, and became corrupted with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I found them and discovered in one XVIII ounces, and in the other VI Z., and the incisions should be made if you look at whether the hairs are moist, and the color of the artel is blainche and moist and of subtle root; if the cope has a spatumile large, and they are in your presence, the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in the cutter there often come too large dislocations of blood, and if you do not stop, then you must cauterize; and if you see the hairs oozing out of the incision and burning with fire, take a piece of well-twisted wire, and enter the artel as we have said, and leave it there; then restrain, and do not stop twisting the wire until it covers the artel, and work it around; if the roots are large, then at once press the cope against the belly, but you must well cover the middle part, then cauterize so that it does not revive; then cure the wound, and keep the hell which is of fuxe color and poor sense and lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are enchanted galls, and I will come to the cure of this chancre afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture,
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, it appears that the wound or cut of the shoulder is caused by burning with hot iron or slicing with razor blade, and it is in the abdomen and sometimes there are some stones, as if it happened in other ways, or arteries according to which is before, or ventsitoit; and if it is by the rupture of the burning shoulder and the issue of the stone, then the color of the gall is similar to the color of the heart, and it is a light thing with pain, and open and diverse issue.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	1. And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on both sides, it returns, and by chance if it stretches, it enlarges the opening to the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	2. And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and it opens well when one presses on it with one's hand; it does not constrain the patient; and if it is due to sanguination, then it is open according to these signs, and the blood is thick and hard, and it is felt according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to vomiting, then the abdomen is opened when one looks at the appearance, whether it is from the sanguination of the artery, vein, or vomiting.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it comes to pass that you let the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If it comes to pass that you let the treatment, then there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and the vein. If the appearance is in the intestine or the bowels, then command the midwife to touch her fingers to the skin, and extend them all sides, then press around the entire wound; then command her to squeeze blood between her hands, then go around the leg that you have signed with the entire large uncini; then tie the other half of the abscess firmly with a strong cord or rope, or a fine silk thread tightly; then apply the other half of the expanded abscess to the thread, and your index finger indicates, and touch the intestine; if you catch it with the thread, and if it slips, cut the intestine at the top of the stomach; if you catch the bowels, and if they are in the colon, and clear the excess; if the artery is against or the vein, and goes further in, then return to your ovraige and take two hooks, and two threads of the length of your fingers, and tie them around what you have done as if you were making sure; then stretch the abscess in four parts along the hooks, and if you see, see the hooks, and leave the leg as it bleeds, and watch the abscess until it stops, or if it pours out subtly and slowly, then cure what comes of this, and cut the abscess as we have said; and draw the sanc or the moistor that you caught, then cure the wound of what comes, and soothe the leg as we have said.
dou chancre	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of symptoms, and it is noted that one must overcome with medicines, and it is noted that silver is used for the cure; and we say that syphilis enjoys in the marriage, and great caution in the cure, and they tell the old man that when syphilis is in the flesh or can be removed if it is like the chancres which are in the breasts, and in the groin, and in the resemblance of them, and it must be all overdone when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and ancient, if not able to approach it, for I have never seen any healing; and no one has ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And the dislocation, when it is in its place or can be ousted, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black oil once; then make it healthier if there is manifest fullness, then cut the bone in the shoulder to make the dislocation; then your shoulder or chin grows cold, and all the hair falls out, and the bones of all parts feel nothing left; leave the sand all that remains, and press well the wound in your hand or on anything, and if they dislocate again after the cauterization, so that the without are not stained; then cure another time as soon as it is healthy.
de ydropisie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’ils sont lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And now, let us proceed with the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And now, let us proceed with the second part. If there is any doubt, it should not be too much if it enters only as far as the intestine when it is passed through the anus, and it cannot be bled; then look if the watery discharge is directed towards the intestines: if it comes that you need to cut it off from the feces three times right after the anus; and if it is due to liver disease, then the cut should be at the left side of the anus three times; and if it is due to gallbladder, then it should be on the right side of the anus three times; and if it is due to small intestine, then it should be on the left side of the anus three times, and not let the small intestine bleed while the superfluities flow to the weakest part of the liver; then perforate all the skin with the instrument, and the bougie, and ease your hand over all the skin between the skin and the stool as you would scrape dough or a wet cheese; then perforate the stool until the skin has come eight times to the anus, which is the sign of the ague, then pull out the instrument and the bougie, and this is the form it should be:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	The first sentence translates to: "It resembles a silver thread, and is of light iron or light gold, and has a small pore in the part opposite the little pore; and on one side, three pores; and on another side, two, and one; and it is cut so that it resembles a pen, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes make with the pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	The second sentence translates to: "At the head of the wound is a large opening, so that when it becomes sharp, now use the instrument; empty the first part or the third part, for if you see more than it can contain in that hour, by chance if the man's soul has resolved his heart of the arm, or if he has cold hands, or if he is near death; but according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of his virtue mean, and his wounds; then withdraw the instrument and hold the wound, and it will be held now by the part that is bubbling in the pore that was inserted in the suture, according to what I have spoken, so that you can see this way; then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the man suffering like this, and take a small quantity of the wound; do this every day, and keep the wound clean as long as it does not dry out but only a little bit of wound.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you doubt the patient's condition, and they refuse treatment, then the care of the grave or sand bath is necessary, and through drinking or bathing and in the sun, and it becomes flushed; and the care of dry medicines as soon as they are healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the sickness, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the tooth
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is ever born without having a fever in the tooth, or if the fever is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is too much to perceive at all, not even with the most delicate sensation, according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the catheter subtly, and tie it and the tube, and leave it for three or four hours, or eight, and when you see urine, if it is not closed, then let it be, and then reinsert; and by chance, no one will close, because the urine that comes out does not close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the catheter is small, if it is treated with a tight clot, as we have said, if it stretches.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the catheter in their groin are bleeding, because no one is born with a catheter at the top of the thigh, for they cannot urinate before they cut off their thigh; and they cannot enjoin because of this, because the matter cannot come out just yet, and it is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And the manner of the operation, if the patient is in pain on his back, is that the handle of the scalpel is like the size of a pen, and it must be held firmly, and do not move the eye that comes often, and if it comes, if the wound is infected, and cure the wound as soon as it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	2. of the pustules of the scalpel
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	3. Many times they come out of the scalpel in the wound, and it looks like a rough appearance; and among them are malignant and non-malignant ones; if you decide to remove them from the subcutaneous tissue, and cut and clean all, then put on soft cotton in Egyptian ointment; then the care of ointment is done as soon as it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the wound is malignant, of putrid color and large size, then it comes that you will need cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have treated it, and the wound is still raw, and has both hair and skin, then it comes that you must remove the part that was shaved; and when it is healed, if the skin is healed.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you have treated it together, if you do not make sure that the head of the wound is not seen, and it becomes black and corrupt in its mouth and around; then all that is black and corrupted comes away, then apply honey and flour to the wound which is made from the dregs of grapes and vinegar, then other cures as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood is drawn, then follow this form of the moon cauterization:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	If the cauterization helps in these two positions: it is knowledge, of blood loss and corruption; and if the head of the gallbladder is corrupted and returns, if you can tie a cord around the gallbladder and pierce the malaides through; and when the skin arrives at the end of the gallbladder that has not been circumcised, or has been injured by plague or abscess, then it is necessary to scarify it with the instrument's blade as much as the skin is slippery, and release the gallbladder from the gallbladder; and if this is a difficult matter to do, then scarify the gallbladder in the spatulum of any part of the gallbladder and the gallstone; then apply a thin layer of wet linen to the two, and let it be cold.
de la circoncision	Of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a major wound if it is similar to others; however, when we perform this work out of our own will and for the benefit of our children, and in fact, it is the best work we can do and the most gentle for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not call circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the greatest part of the masters and physicians who performed circumcision inside the dial, and had force and at all ages; if it were possible to know, it would be better than having many toiles, and by chance, if one wants to do that of another, and moreover, if it is done without force.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the wound is cleaned, and there is double pain, and to the circumcision which is not securely held, the point of the painful member; and to the circumcision of the finger by chance escapes the iron, and cuts the skin, and many times grow again because they have no skill in circumcision and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the circumcision which is made with force, I have found the benefit of the experiment because the forces cut both sides of the thread equally as well as without it.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, if it cuts equally on both sides; but that the thread should be well twisted around the nail; and that the first dislocation is done in such a way that the child does not think he is being hurt, only that you are tying the thread around the finger so that he can see, and then tie it in all the ways you can think of; then you put your hand on the finger and blow on it or keur, and raise it as high as the head of the finger is assembled, then mundify well the dirt that is gathered there, then tie a double knot of the thread, then tie the other end to the other lien; and you hold it in place by the second reading in the pouch and the dot index, and cap between the two liens, then gently pull on the keur handle and raise the head of the finger; then let the sanc poc and poc, because it is the worst part; and put some powder on it and dust it with some powder from a cooked beef cut in slices, pickled in red wine, and fried, and leave it sus jusc’a the other jor, and the cure of another cure as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the mummification is this: the two heads are flat and thin, and are as strong as the fingers.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mummification is when the skin comes out at the incision; therefore, it is necessary to extend it along your finger, unless the flesh is gangrene; and it should be done properly, and if you do not hold it with your finger, then the skin.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass three days, and the wound is in a state of gangrene, if you allow it to be so that the gangrene does not become aggravated, and lightly burn it; if the skin is as you hold it from the part of the wound, it will not hurt you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first sentence to translate is: "Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s'on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	If urination is difficult due to cystitis, or gallstones, or bowels, or a bowel obstruction, or similar things, that we mentioned in the division; and if urine is not passed, and you see the retention at the urethral opening, which is at the top or bottom of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his side, and his abdomen is expanded from the part below the loins, and the abdomen is restricted as much as possible; and then the patient's lower abdomen is compressed at the urethral opening to prevent the passage of urine, and if it does not pass, and as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you apply an extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", and its form is: a fine silver thread, like the tail of a peacock; and a long and half-hard palm, and it should be finely spun at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	The manner of the urine's exit if you take a double thread and tie it at the tip of the cotton or linen, and cut the tip of the thread with the sewing needle; and remove the excess linen and cut the tip of the thread, then anoint the thread with oil or butter and ointment of urine and urine of ox, and seat the patient on the seat, and the bladder and the vessel moistened with oil of olive and wormwood tea; then gently place the thread in the vessel, as it reaches the root of the vessel, then double the vessel towards the belly; then cut the thread before it reaches the bladder, and feel the patient come out of the bladder, and this is done according to this order because either the guide or the patient will turn; then the thread is all through the linen pouch and pouch, and the urine follows the linen, then it is drawn out further, and the urine is made up; and the siringue resumes when the bladder is empty and the patient is alleviated.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are scorching or bloody discharges in the bladder, or when an abscess is formed and you see water and medicines distilling, then use all the instrument called "cathoscopy", and it is shaped like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it is third-degree (II on one side, I on the other, as you see), then use the cystoscope according to the medicine you have; if it burns well without addition, then you can draw off the mucus, and if you can, then insert the speculum into the mucus; when you see your medicines running in the bladder, put the head of the cystoscope into the mucus, and draw it out at the drawing-out which is at the end; if you draw out the mucus from the cystoscope, and then forcefully push the drawing-out back in, if the mucus enters the bladder now, and comes to the surface, then the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle cystoscope which is used to catoscope the bladder: if that is the case.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or archaut, and the head is higher up; and then take a sheep's bladder and put on the moister that you see clisterizing the bladder, then lay it between the two eyes to form a double boil, and heat the moister over the fire; then cut the chief of the clistere in the verge, then hold your hand on the bladder all the moister coming out, as if the patient feels that the moister has reached the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make the circle, and perforate it roundly around; then pull the strong thread through these punctures, then assemble the circle as one would assemble a dial, and put in what you see of oil and moister and whey, and lay it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand as much as the moister comes to the bladder.
de la piere	From the incision
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division of the ways of incision and extraction of arrows; and we said the difference between the incision as it should be, and those signs, and in what piere one must over in size; and in the vessie, and in the verge; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the incision which is most often in the vessie is in children, and it is a sign that the aigue of the vessie has jumped to its subtility; and it is open harene, and grates the malaides's verge many times, and then enriches; and then the jumps of the enfans are found; and it is the lightest sanation of the enfans until they are IIII years old, and it is grief in viellars, and it is as jones moiene, for those who are between jonesce and viellece; and it is the cure more legiere for those who have big piere, than for those who have small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, if we cover the patient with cloths dipped in cold water, we must cleanse all the insides.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never closes the wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the shoulders, stand up, and move him downwards until the wound reaches the top of the bladder, and does not once rise above it; then place his hands between your hands, and his fingers are flat against his thighs if the bladder is completely deflated; then press and touch the wound; if you feel the wound in its entirety, then now cut at the wound.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If she does not feel any pain, if your index finger indicates olive oil from the left hand, or if it is wet, if the bone in its foundation, and you want to pierce it, and when you feel with your finger, if the bone at the top of the vagina; then press on your finger, and the bone in its socket.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the vagina with his hand, and he commands him to extend his left hand with the fingers upwards, and with his right hand to grasp the hairs that are loose in the part where the cut is made; then he pierces the spatule copant, as it is formed:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	1. And they pass between the ribs and the foundation, not in the costal margin of the left side; and there should be three on either side of the incision, and the size should be large enough to cover if it becomes wide due to pressure, and should be narrowed according to the amount of the incision, not too large; by chance, the pressure should be applied if it is at the foundation, so that it does not cause pain in working; and they should check if there is any part with a piece missing or angles, and margins: if they are rough to come out; and if a part is tied, it resembles a girdle, and curves, whose end is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	1. If the wound has angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not fall, then you must pull on the nails as if they were nails in a hoof, to tighten the wound so that it does not slip; or you may use a fine instrument pointed at the head; and if you do not manage to pull it out, then enlarge the opening if possible, and if it is not too large, then use vitriol to tighten it; and if there are more than one wound, then first pull out the largest one at the top of the bladder, then cleanse it, then tie it off, and the smaller ones after that.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If it is not treated promptly, it can lead to a large wound and further injury.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things can happen to the patient: either they die, or urine comes out due to the urethra not being able to close; but you should try as much as possible to draw it out, or to shave it off with a razor, until you have completed your work. When you have finished, use frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and extract it, and put on soft cloths soaked in oil and wine, or in rosewater and cold water, to alleviate the soreness; then stitch up the patient at the base of the urethra, and do not leave any loose thread.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you dislocate it, if the joint is well oiled with oil and sage, then the cure of ointment dyefacient and basilic ointment, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess comes into the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the vein, and this retention of urine, which is done in a way that without jumping with the urine: you must cut out the pus, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will cause the vein to burst, and bleed; then cleanse the wound with oil and sage, and all other means you know, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the times you treat it, that you lie the thighs and assemble the medicines under the armpit.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the prick is small and it is conducted with a needle, and it is cleaned, and the urine cannot be discharged; if the treatment I described fails repeatedly, you will be excused for the size of this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already done that.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Prepare to forge according to this form and make it at a third angle, one ton.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the wire and pull it through the hole opposite the prick, so that it does not get stuck in the vessel; then bend the wire around the needle lightly, as it reaches the prick; and turn the wire back to your hand at the prick as much as you can, until you can feel the prick from the other side; if a lot of urine comes out, then press your hand on the part where the needle is stuck in the hole.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bone is so broken, and it breaks with urine, and the gut of the patient; and if you do not know how to do anything else, then cut off the end of the piercing and the other side, then make a groove between the two bones, then pull out the piece that was stuck, and remove the ligature that is in the wound; and treat the patient as soon as they are healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the piercing of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	If the piercing is not enlarged in women, and if there is no time, then the cure is done by three things: one is that by chance the woman is a virgin; the second is that it is not possible to find a woman well knowing who has been defiled as much as she has, even when she is cast.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	1. And the third way is if by chance one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of hands; and the fourth way is if the woman's wound is more than the man's, because it requires a more precise size, and great pain it causes. And if necessary, remove her to this, and choose a woman well knowing, and if she does not know, then cast a subtle spell; and she presents a wise lesson in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she do what you command in the inquisition of the wound; and look well if the woman is virgin: therefore it is her duty to bind or found and seek the wound; and if she binds, if she constrains her duty, and recommends that she bind or with the midwife, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If the wound is large, if it moves little by little from the entrance of the vagina up to the root of the thigh, until it reaches the bone; then cut at the hole in the bone, at the root of the thigh, where it is most sensitive, and do not move the knife above or below the wound, and make it as small as possible at first; then bind it with a bandage, if you feel the wound so sharp that the wound can bleed, and know that there are many kinds of wounds: this is to know, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and crooked, and those that have veins.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you want to know the appearance to know the end.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you do not want to see the appearance, then put vitrol on the wound and hold it for an hour until it is not stained; then return to your work, as long as the wound is healed, and have the splints that I told you about in the extraction of the wound to help you in your work; and if you do not want to see this, and it is a blocked artery, then put powder on the wound and bandage and bind with ribbons, and do not continue this, and leave the wound and do not touch it by chance it dies, then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the pain of the wound is eased, and it is read, if you return to your work, as long as the wound is healing.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia cancer
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Sweat is nothing more than an assembly of moisture or white sodium, which is contained in the urine; and it is called "soda," and no time is ever properly in the urine, if one cares that it is another urine; and this is the leather between the white soda that we have said; and there was never any.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this sweat is due to the lack of it coming from the bladder, and it is expanded that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	1. And no time when it comes from striking the bones, and this moisture in many colors: either it is declining to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or white, and this becomes more; and these are the signs of this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then it is the apothecary's remedy, I poc long if it looks like a toy, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	2. And if it has moisture in its own cloth, then it is the apothecary's remedy with a part of the urine, and because one thinks it is other ointments; and if the moisture is between the skin of the bones and the white facial, then it feels well; therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, sprinkle all over the introitory instrument before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introduction, judge whether it is dependent or independent.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we come to perform the operation, if it is possible to make the patient healthy according to what we can do and the completion of his chest; then he lies on his back, with his legs spread wide apart, and places a cloth on his body; then he lifts up his right side, and commands the assistant to lift up his left arm, and extends the gauze between the two fifth ribs and the costal cartilage; then he takes the spatula, and cuts through the costal cartilage of the ribs, from the top to the point where the wound is, and makes it as straight as possible, and removes all the blood; then he pierces the wound with a sharp needle at the large abscess, and extracts all the pus, and then places his fingers, and presses the wound on both sides, so that he does not touch the costal cartilage, but only the wound itself; if the wound is deep, then he should carefully remove it, and if the wound is shallow, then he should stitch it with two needles at once, if he does not stitch it well enough, then the wound will re-open; and if the wound is large, then he should assemble the two ribs on both sides of the costal cartilage, and treat it as the other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the corrupted male organ to be of another disease, then it comes to lie down the suspended vessels that are suspected, doubting the escape of blood; then cut the coil at all the suspended ones, and extract the male organ, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And when the swelling is assembled in two parts, as branches; then cut off the other part as you have done the first one, and take out the blood, and put into the wound fine, soft in oil rose; and put on another layer of soft linen in wine and oil, and put over the two coils, and put double-folded rags, and lie it down on all the parts that are according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	1. Then take two threads, and use fine wool according to this appearance and they should be gathered by stitching in the gore of the braies, and some of the points preen at the foundation just behind the back, and others at the part where the point is; and the other two chiefs at the two angles, so that all gathered is the restriction in the braier's band; and never has medicine been this way for the fire cautery on the sharp edge of the steel, and it is that you preen the subtle cultellary cautery and cope the leather of the harness, and so wash if as we have said, if that the white that contains the ague is discovered; if you take the cautery according to this form, and perch the white as bones, and scorch it at this subtle cultellary chop.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	1. And the victory is achieved in all ways that you can; as long as you are diligent in everything. 2. Keeps the head from touching the foot; and cares that this work is more safe; and keeps away from dislocation of blood, and prevents deformity of the limb, and nothing else makes you contrary, whether amputation or dislocation of blood or another thing, if you cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	1. And if the patient is not careful and does not wait for this treatment due to its horror, then perhaps it is perforation, as I said, and if you are sure about the meanings we have said that this is the way, then make the patient sit on the chair with his legs spread; then perceive the aperture in the part most distant from all the surrounding tissue, and make the perforation long enough for the wound to close; and if the wound is large, then make sure it closes; then put cotton on the leg, and bandage it, and leave the wound to close the pus, and cure as long as the wound is healed; and if the bladder ruptures, do not let the pus come out of the wound's mouth, if you must use a needle or instrument to treat the pus from the hydrops, then enlarge the wound, and see if the pus returns, and assemble the wound after six months or more, and when it is assembled, as before, and then pass the patient's years.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the thumb
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Saws that in the section of this ramus have fear in more dispositions, because it seems to me that you should leave it; and I will tell you the evacuation and the appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that all abscesses come either through wounds or injuries, and the same for thumbs; and this is by case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know by excessive sweetness and acidity, which is expanded in the thumbs, or by percussion; and the appearance of the abscess is according to the color of the wound, and is not painful, and is a gangrene, and some are gangrenous and purulent, and of fungoid color, and never come from an artery, or from inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, if it is affected by the arrangement of the abscess, when you press on it with your two hands; and only then will you be able to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	This one made of veins is affected by its arrangement at the expression of touching with two hands, and can very well make the size according to this appearance, and according to the others; and it is that you cut off the head of the vein, then it becomes white and bluish in color, and delivers the suspensory from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the vein is already closed with these knots, then it is necessary to cut the vein and take it; and if it is in the white, or in the one that is dependent on the vessels, then it is necessary to deliver all of this vein, and the knot recoils.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is from below, and it is stuck, and you manage to free it all, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, if you use the smooth woolen wound with oil of rose and wine, then apply other cures as needed until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the boils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a boil enveloped in a covering resembling a bandage, with the softening of the boils, and the patient groans as it happens; and the treatment of this disease is well done, and we will tell you the work of the patient, according to what was done in ancient times.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	1. It is necessary that you make the patient lie down on his side, then hold the suspender tightly with both hands, all the limbs that are close to the verge, and mark the masters, and stretch them out; then cut through large pieces of spumy trenching across the vessels as they are discovered, and then scar each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then take out a needle or if it has a double thread, and tie it to the first lesion where the vis came from, and tie it to the other end; then cut it evenly, according to the length of the course, and in the veins that are corrupted; then cure the wound as we have done with the others, if any bowels are coming out, so that no one of the vessels ruptures; for this does not cause any harm, and all the vessels come out if you tie the strings to all the vessels; if the patient loses his virility through the incision of the vessels and becomes emasculated and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of a sinew
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The signs when it is extension of the tendon, if it is that there are few and far between in long stretches, and does not come suddenly; and it is the grief faix until towards the end, because the tendon presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is rupture of the tendon, which makes pain come at the beginning, and it is the grief faix appearing divers times, not far from the skin, and it is because of the exit of the intestine and the wound at the end of the tendon.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And no time does the circles descend with the intestine, and it is held back, and great pain is suffered by the patient, even when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	In these treatments of iron for pain, because it cannot be escaped.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these treatments of iron for pain, because it cannot be escaped. If the intestine is to be returned with the hand in the wound, then it causes great pain to the patient, even when pressed. If the wound is deep, and the intestine is wrapped around it, then it should be cut open, and the blunt end of a knife should be inserted into the wound, and the blunt end of the knife should be moved upwards towards the tail, and the patient's leg should be held up by the surgeon. If there is no intestine wrapped around the wound, or if there is no blunt end of a knife available, then the bite of the needle should be made in the abdomen, and the needles should be inserted into the wound, starting from the inside, and the needles should be moved upwards towards the tail, and the sutures should be tied in a cross pattern, and the sutures should be tied with the same force as the intestine that is wrapped around the wound. The sutures should be cut off, and the knots should be left to dissolve, and the patient's leg should be held up by the surgeon. The patient's leg should be massaged, and the leg should be bandaged with a bandage that is tight enough to prevent blood from flowing out, but not so tight that it causes pain or restricts movement. The patient's leg should be wrapped in cloth, and the wound should be cleaned, and the patient should be given pain medication if necessary.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	For no time is this cauterized the white skin that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of the evacuation of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the linen as it is; and if it delays too long, if it is raised with hot water, and does as we have said, then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia caruncle
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this matter, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made in such a way that the ramie is assembled like the vis, in the same manner that you tie the veins, after lightly cutting them at the tail; then cover it, and cure the abscess of that which operates, until the veins cease; and the cure as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	1. No time does cauterization cause pain, as we have said, and it opens the wounds; and no bowels are ever torn, and if they are, it is little, and all wounds are healed within hours; and if the patient remains too long in this position, thinking it is a wound or a fissure, until the bowels are torn, then it is due to the extension of the anger, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and compressed the legs and opened; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and never has a cure been made in this way: and it is that the patient groans on his back between your hands, then compress the leg that is torn, according to the size of the third does; and then remove the fissure that is dry from the skin that follows, then take the rag and put it on the leg appearing dry from the rag's dryness, and press on the two legs appearing dry from the rag's dryness, and do not remove the rag or extend the fissure or the uterus or anything else, as we have shown you in the cure of the wounds of the intestines; then the cure is by the cure of the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When you cut the threads, if the wound is cleaned and healed, as soon as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The scar is bound, and has no appearance in the healing, and the cauterization is more effective at a distance from the wound, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the bones.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the bones is softened, because the charcoal that is made is softened, and it can be seen; and it is the craftsman's job, when one sees the cauterization, to make the knife on its back, and cut the softened leather on the natural leather; then assemble the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, first the excess of the softened leather is at three stitches or four firmly; then cut between the stitches, and it cures as well as the others wounds, as soon as it is healthy, and cuts the thread.
dou chastrement	1. "dou chastrement" translates
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	1. "Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi" translates to "It is prohibited in our law to inflict punishment by means of chastisement.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that there are two ways to make a cauterization: either by attraction or by burning.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one where we make it by attraction, let our hand be well moistened with warm water, as long as the coagulum is soft and while; then draw them back to your hand, as soon as they are put in place and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the cauterization of size: you must anesthetize the skin, and press the leather of the coagulum to your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each time you have well burned the coagulum; and leave no drop of blood or the subtle blood that is on the veins; and this way of cauterization is worse than the one made by attraction, because attraction does not end by chance any thing of the coagulum, by the skin desires luxury; then cure the wound as much as it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de fe
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermofrodie is according to two kinds of men: one is that when between the two lips it is open and like the shape of a woman's body, or it has hair, and never in any case does it cut the urethra.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other kind is in women, and has as its lips like a girl's and the lips.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of the mouth and stomach is that you cut off all the hairs, and treat them like other wounds; in the second kind, men whose urine comes out through the lips, without any treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the temptation
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Temptation is an artificial addition to the natural part, as it is too ugly to see; and no woman has it as great as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of temptation from your hand or fingers, and lightly; and do not apply too much force, as it may cause pain, then the cure of another cure until it is healthy; and a another char that is in the mouth of the married woman, and the emplace, and by chance it jumps, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called it the ancient "cowardly disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to copy it, as we have said, and to cure it as soon as it is healthy.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If it is erratic in nature, that is, if the woman is not well-formed, or if the belly is small; and this is by nature, or caused by an accident due to illness that has come; or it is due to excessive desire, or subtle semen, and is made in the marriage bed, or in the costume, or in the bed, or wherever else; and defilement, and childbirth, and by chance, the flow may be; and the knowledge of this is by the regret of the woman.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	When the patient feels pain, if they want to stop or continue.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the patient feels sharp pain, and the wounds are bleeding, if you hurry, and the wounds open: take your two needles, and the woman should lie on her back, spread her legs; then the wounds form, as long as the sharp pain is felt, and the wounds open; then take a linen cloth, and some oil, and put it on the wound, and gently press the woman's belly every hour until it stops bleeding.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the pain is hard and fast, then you must tie it with a thread like a sail cloth.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the swelling is from a burn, if the pressure is in the bone and cheek; and take the medicines that are bitter, as bitter as dragon's blood, incense, and a large amount of urine; then make a poultice of it, so that the wound can heal; and leave it for a long time, and make a tent of dry linen; then cure other treatments as much as necessary until it is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	2. And when the swelling comes from burns, if it is necessary to cut according to this manner, do not be afraid of being enchanted.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	3. For the enchantment that is in the swelling, it should not be touched with force.
des emorroides	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Emorroydes are openings of veins that do not heal easily, and when they become old they turn into ulcers; and we have said in the division of the appearances and signs, and I will say those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that both emorroydes and ulcers, when they are formed in marriage, do not appear to the touch, unless it is by the force of the cure.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are in the mouth of the wife, one can feel them, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	1. It is necessary that you put the woman in a cool house, then take off the clothes with nails, and cut her hair at its roots, then dust some medicines restricting blood loss, as bitter as ice and blood of dragon and incense, and similar things; then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, then put them in a cold bath; and if she loses blood and comes out, if I make it stay in a decoction of sumac and extract of crab apples and gallberries and similar things, and then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and vinegar, and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	If it becomes dislocated, it is bad.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If it does not become dislocated, make the patient lie on their back and apply pressure to the shoulder; then take the joint, and the joint in milk of plantain or wine vinegar, and apply it to the shoulder.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is healed, treat the shoulder with ointment until it is healthy; and the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the sharp herb I mentioned earlier, if it works as expected; and then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	wounds of the marriage bed
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many forms of abscess come in the marriage, like gangrene and puerperal abscess and herpes and fistulas and abscesses and hemorrhoids and chancroid, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, in this treatment, it is necessary to deal with the furuncle that comes in marriage, which is not an abscess but a bowel; and if you see the symptoms of the abscess, if you look at whether the abscess is red at the beginning of its coming, and plain of chill and fever, and if it becomes red, you should see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	1. Therefore, do not hurry to operate, but make sure the pain is subsided; and then place the patient on the bed, and let them have two pillows or adjust their back and assemble their limbs as they fit the leg; and let their knees be slightly spread, and put their hands on their thighs at the groin, and hold them well with a belt; then move the instrument towards the left side, and afterwards come the form of the maw; and it is necessary that when you see the instrument being applied, you fix the first part to know the fitting of the maw, so that what enters through the instrument does not fit more than it should, and does not cause pain to the patient; and if they are larger, it is necessary to cover the fitting of the maw with cloths, so that the patients do not grieve; and it is necessary to place the handle of the instrument at the end, and to shape the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the stitches are opened, and it is made into a soft ball in the hand, if it comes close to the head, apply it to the wound; when the bow is visible, it is necessary to put soft tents in olive oil or vinegar oil in the wound; put the tent for the wound at the end of the arm, and put it on the arm and the puncture point that are clean and soft with warm or cold medicines until it is cured; then the doctor after two days of treatment, as long as it is healthy; and never raise the wound and the arm by cloth and honey, and then with honey or roots of lilies and aristolochum that are cooked; then continue the treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	If the wound is treated with hot iron, then you must keep yourself from cooking with it, but we have said in the division how to do it.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Childbirth is first in the dance that the woman knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see her press against the bed, and desire to smell the aroma: therefore, hasten to give birth to the child; then assure yourself that these children are according to the natural figure, and they come from your womb, and the second one with him; and when you see these signs, it is appropriate to gently press on his belly if he comes soonest; for when he descends from his head, if he comes with the second one, and is monied by the superfluities of good cleanliness, and that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For there is no time when it comes to his feet, and it comes to the heart or head, and the hands, or when it comes to his belly or side, and it is converted by chance in his collarbone, and by other harmful figures; if it is skilled in the dance that it is wise and subtle in these things, and warns against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures so that one can help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out naturally at the time of birth, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her virtues are weak, then if she is placed on a stool or the women hold her, and if the olive oil or fenugreek is cooked, and then the dance is performed between its two small spatula forms.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And the second line, and press on his nail as much as the moisture that is in it to be corrected; and insert the woman's belly as much as the children descend, and if they do not descend, then it is necessary to close the woman's thigh with fenugreek oil; then it should be inserted and fastened with thread, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if now the children are born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the hands come out further, then it is necessary to gently touch them with a little thread; and if they do not enter, then the woman should sit on her knees, and lift the feet above; then lower the seat on the ground, and examine the woman to make sure she does not have any swelling; and if the hands cannot be inserted, and the children are dead, then it is necessary to press the hands on the coccyx that is in front, and take out the child, and reset it gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the child's foot
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes to its feet, if it is able to stand; and then it wobbles a little, until it is steady; then it grasps its feet and extends them a little at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can it jump as high as the command, and I will make it jump from a height; if it jumps, let God be praised.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, if it wobbles a little, until it is in accordance with the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	When it does not come out as we have described, say if it is very difficult to seize, and oil of sweet almonds, and gum resin, and wax all in mortar; and according to the nature of the woman's breast and relieve this pain, then place it in cold water until it becomes numb; when it becomes numb, take the wire of iron, and insert it, and remove it, and leave it for an hour; then place it in the seat, then stretch and close the mouth and nose, and press on the stomach slightly, as the child now leaps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the child's issue when it is born
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if the woman holds her hands close and close; then she should hold onto its neck with one hand and let the other hand hang down, and she should hold the baby's leg with the other hand; and she should fold her hands close and close; and she should press her hands on her stomach and pull the baby's legs apart as much as possible; and if the child does not jump, then she should hold its head and knees, then she should push her belly forward, and then she should give birth; and the woman should have her hands close; and command the woman to press as much as the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out wide with a hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to have an engineer bring the hand: if it cannot be brought, then I will lift the woman; and go; if she cannot go, then I will make her sit on the bed, and straighten the legs; then relax the muscles that I have mentioned; and if there is no child, then I will make her sit on the seat, and study to bring the hand back; and when the child is born naturally, I will stretch it, and command that it be pulled as much as the child can hold.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child from its neck, and have expanded its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	1. It is necessary that the patient's hand tingles, then turn it slightly and lightly; when it is equalized, if it is applied with the natural oily nature of musk and oil, as we have said, then it is commanded to move slightly and slightly; when this is done, if it is held firmly at the seat, it is commanded to press; and this is completed.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	2. In the same manner for all subsequent ones.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	3. When it comes to this manner for all subsequent ones, if the second one covers your nail as long as moisture is present; and if the children can be placed on their face and neck, if the covering causes pain, and they die, then cut off the child's ear, as you have done, and command the woman to press no time: therefore, it should be done lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Sicknesses that occur with twins are often repeated, and never in the third or fourth month; and this is a strange thing, and not many have heard of it.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are strange, and never live long, and few know of them; I know that they are multiplied, and are destroyed by the poison that they give off, which is like the bow; and they never issue naturally as all do under one, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue reluctantly, as we have said, and it is the subtle dance, and made quickly and lightly what it does; and it is done as it should be for salutation.
de plusors enfans	Of more children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	No children are ever formed in the marriage of I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more, up to XV, and they are all formed as a child by the measure of the glowing sap, and cover the entire body because of chance, as it seems; if you follow this according to what is needed.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to open with your hands; if it comes that the woman is in good health, and has no accident or dies; if it comes that the woman is well-hung from her back, and her thighs are inclined downwards, and her legs raised; and the midwife applies the teign of II pars, or she is laid in bed so that the child is not born; then gently anoint the mouth of the woman with oily oils with mustard and fenugreek and linseed oil, then anoint her hands with these oils and mustard; then blow on the mouth of the woman lightly, then take I leu or the bones that are flexible at this time, and if the child is approaching its head, you should take the bones from her elbows or collarbone or mouth or beard or chin or chin-whiskers, and if the child descends through her vagina, you should take the bones from her left hand, and put the bowl between her right hand's little fingers, and blow gently on all your hands, and do not let the bone be in any of these places that we have said, until it is out of the thing seen; and this is the form of the bone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then, if you find another bone, or the other is not yours, and if the extraction is equal; and then, it should be even by moving from one side to the other, according to your ability, and so hold the bones with your teeth, as in this case:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part breaks off, and some parts of both bones are broken off, and the other parts are left; and if it does not break off at all, then place this bone higher up, and continue until all parts are left.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by extension, then wrap it around as in a drape, until it is completely; then the cope is in the joint of the plant or the knee, and it comes that you do it with the other hand, and the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	1. If the child's head is large and misshapen, or if there is a swelling assembled, then it is necessary to remove the spinal bone between your two hands and cut the swelling and extract the spine; or you will use the instrument called "almidach" which comes with the forces or chaperone after it; and then naturally make the child's head large; and then pull on the bones with the tines, and if it is not broken, as long as the moisture that is or has come out is not broken, and if it cannot pass, then it is held by pieces of the mouth that you have; and if it is enlarged in the belly or displaced in the costez, then it must be removed as much as the moisture allows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is among its flock, if it is the light attraction, and the milk of the mother is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if the child is in the belly or the thigh, if it covers that you pull it out by the side with your hand; and when the belly or the thigh, as long as the moisture that is there; and if other bones are broken, and the head is dislocated, then bite your hand with the milk of the mother, and draw it to the mouth of the mother; then take the gullet or both, and pull it out; and if the mouth of the mother is retreated because of the swelling that came, if there is no difficulty, then administer moist and light things; and the administrator pours them in cold water and makes them moist and soft.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is in its costume, and you put it in place equal, then do as we have said in the living child; and if there is no harm, if the part fits, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the child is as we have said in the apoplexy cases that come to the midwife; and if the dislocations occur, if it is treated with heat, and it is misaligned.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I see a woman in whose belly some children had died, then consulted another and was told that it would die, the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time came some abscesses in the flesh, and inflamed as soon as they were opened, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the cure, and I thought long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I used strong astringents for great attraction, and after some days more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised much, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If you thought that it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted the wound, and with my hands I felt bones as long as the woman was in better point; and she saw the woman's long wound in a short time, and it was far from the knee; and I do not remember this chapter because when the master did an strange thing, I thought he would help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the dislocation back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Then comes the form of pressure, where we close the books; and as the head returns to its place, the shoulders are realigned.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Indeed, the corners should be more subtle and restrictive, and made of flat or rounded wood; and the mouth should be no wider than the head, and the margins of the arms should be equal to a palm and a half, and a little more than a palm on each side; and these adjustments should be made in the mouth of the dislocation for opening when turning the corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	1. Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, can be made from flat or rosewood, depending on the appearance of the nails; and it has two heads, as you see, like a palm of the hand, and they are wide; and when you open the mare, as you see with all the instruments, place the woman's foot on the instrument, the thighs and legs over it, then adjust the two heads together in the mare, and hold the end of the instrument's handle between your fingers; then operate your hand with all the instruments, as you have done with the nails evenly, according to the amount you see open the mouth of the mare, until the horse feels comfortable and ready.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	1. These instruments are all similar in appearance, and when they are examined, the more skilled they become at operating them, and the higher they rise in value according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	2. If you do not despise the instrument that you have not yet examined, because its needs are not easily satisfied.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	3. When the second child is born, if it is necessary to command the midwife to release the placenta, and then to cut it away from the uterus, and to hold the hands of the mouth and anus; and if it leaps for this reason, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, then if I can, and make an opening or covering, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the patient, such as garlic, rose, anise, chamomile, calamus, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or can be made into an infusion over fire; then make a gargle or pertus that can, and the other part in the mouth of the patient, and rub it until the vapors come out of the mouth; then make it gargle, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second part is fast.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this cure, and is not better, then command the patient to put her left hand in olive oil or musk oil, and then let it go naturally, and want the second part; and when she finds it, press and extend it gently so that the mouth does not hurt from extraction; but it must move lightly to the right and left, and then take it; if it comes out and is not damaged.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	1. If the mouth of the mare is dry and wrinkled, as we have said, the cure is to moisten and fumigate the herbs; and if it does not do all that we have said, then keep to what we have said, but whatever is in the mare's mouth, tie it to the woman's wrist, then apply ointment tetrafarmacone; if it becomes sore and is replaced, and returns, but if it causes a bad odor in the stomach and head, and makes the patient sick.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	2. If it comes to burning aromatic herbs, no one has ever seen burning of cress and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is such that it burns the woman with the retention of flowers and the second wind if this is:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it seems like a snake, and one places the head subtly in nature, and the wide shoulders under the fire; and it is the fumigations from the charcoal, and the blister as it is burned, and another one begins again.
de percier lou fondement	to perceive the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And many children are born who do not perceive the foundation, but they have been scorched a little with some subtle sauce: if it comes to the point that they perceive this sauce at their will, and do not perceive any spasm from it, and keep the bandage that does not touch; then put on a fine cloth in wine and oil, and the care of the ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not stay, if you put a catheter in its place and leave it hands free, and it is able to move when the child sees them going into the rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this help for wounds or abscesses; if it is needed to cut it: if you cure it, as we have said of the catheter.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula with great foundation.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodulation, and become thicker as they come from the deeper part, or in the space between the two parts; and if there is one nodulation, it becomes rough and blinched or subtle-browned, and never are these fistulas permanent; and they are known by this that they are caused by egestion or ventosity when the patient egests, and by chance some fall.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	If there are fistulas that pus comes from the bladder, and from half of the vagina; and they reach to the junction of the coxae, and to the anus.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	If you want to know if the fistula is at the base, and not elsewhere: and it is that you cut your index or base, and insert a small hook of iron or gold in the fistula when it is not kinked.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	If there is kinking, then you insert a small needle or horsehair, as much as you can feel it in your hand; and if you don't feel it, and there is no discharge from the rectum, vomiting, or incontinence, as we have said: sharpen the needle or horsehair; if you are in a hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is present in the bladder or conducted from the urine, if it leaks and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is present at the joint of the thigh, if it is tight and causes pain in the knee; if it is because of the wound causing constipation, and there is no medicine that can stop it; and in these fistulas there is no cure except for labor and vanity of those who come to it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not a new fistula and is not an old one, there is hope for health by being made of iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient has pain between his hands on his back; and he makes his legs bend until they are against his thighs, and they are inclined to his stomach; then a tent is sewn or planted if there is tortuosity, as long as you check or the testicle comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	1. If the patient feels pain at the base, then it is likely that the bone has been broken; and if you discover or feel between your thumb and index finger the talon or the hoof, then you should be careful that it is not a foreign object; if it cannot be healed, then it is likely that it is a break.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	1. It is not always possible to heal all wounds, but this is rare; and if it is a burn, then you should make the cauterization as small as possible according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned earlier; and the bark should be cut in the fistula as it comes out from the bone; and repeat this two or three times, as long as you are sure that these charsets are hard, which resemble a quill; then the cure of softened wounds should be made, as soon as they heal, then the cure of ointment should be applied, squeezed and anointed.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is healthy, so good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is not healthy, no other sickness can be healthy; and if he tries to enter, and does not pierce the bone that is either foundation or base, and between your hand and the covering a thick covering of char or chalk, you will see the fistula at this point where the covering ends; if the cope begins at the beginning of the fistula, and goes forward before the tent, and then cauterizes after, as it comes to the end of the tent's head; and it will be delivered from the tent, and will hurt; then the charred ones that seem like a pen of a swallow will be destroyed, and none will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If it does not harm you, and cuts between you and the flesh, whether by fire cauterization or medical boiling.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauterization, it assembles two things: to know, the surgery of these burned wounds, and the stopping of blood and the removal of moisture; then the care of raw edges in the belly or in the groin, as long as the wound bleeds, and it will be the scars in the belly; then cure the wound of sore gums with dry char, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes suddenly from the depths, and it is moved away from the heart, if the wound is deep or shallow, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the heat, and enter that it is the cloth, or the sack, or the char, if it was only a sign of hope and expectation, by the administration of one of the three ways: or you cauterize as we have said, or you cover it with wax, or if you put it in place and cure as we have said; and do not take too much time in front, that you do not cover the part that holds the depth, and let the excretions pass through the desired channel; then the cure, as we have said; by chance if it becomes healthy, or you remove that covering and mundify it when it is covered with wax, or with another instrument; then mend the char that is in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to prolong the fistula in the part where the depth is defended: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And no time are fistulas made in this way: and when you reach the fistula with the tent, it is either too tight or too loose at the end of the leather, if you take a tent according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And if you cut it in two, and thread the tent through all the filth in the fistula as much as it is at the head:
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is persuasive at the edge of the deep fistula, take out the thread from that pertuss, and if you reach the head of the deep fistula, assemble the two ends, and pull them apart, and leave one or both; and keep it once, as long as the threads do not come out of these chars that are between two, and close; then cure the wound as soon as it is sore and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you try in all possible ways that you can, it will not work if it is too tight.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not recommended to make the fistula by tightening too much, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny thistle from which the fistula is made if it is too large or too small, and on the other hand, because it cannot be compressed, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of the embryos.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	These embryos can be of two kinds: either they are dense and hard like resin, and have small and large grains, and are cut at the base, and have a few or many pieces, and are deficient in the foundation and at the foundation's top; but those that are deficient in this way have little moisture and are cut at the base with a piece of turquoise or a piece of salt, and have the color of corns; and the treatment for those who have made the foundation deficient is that you command the midwife to expel the pieces as soon as they become hard and she sees the fetuses, and if you hurry, and can take them with your nails or keep them in your fingers, then cut at their roots; and if the uncinate cannot hold them by their moisture, then lay them on the flat or on the cloth, or a piece of linen, and then cut them off and powder some hot powders that are in the cauterizing leu; or you cauterize them as is said in the cauterizing chapter, and cure them with other treatments until they are healthy; and if the pieces cannot issue, then clysterize the midwife with clyster mordant and sharp as she washes what is at the foundation, so that it may issue openly; and if the midwife's mouth is not preened, and the fillets are hard at the foundation, then the lighter cure is to preen the midwife's mouth or nails with tenails, and cut off the pieces, and cure them as we have said, until they are healthy, and do not fear the incision by fire.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If it comes to pass that you must cut the seam according to this manner: take one thread, thread it through an awl, and then draw the thread on the other side, and turn the two ends of the other thread around the awl, and if it is wide; and then tighten the thread, then pull the awl, and make the other threads, and do so to all of them, and leave the excess sand in the wound; then put the foundation damp with oil or rosewater, or ointment, and put it on the foundation, and command the patient to lie down; then leave it as long as it cools, and when it is cold, if the cure of ointment and other cures are needed, so that it is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dis
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there are knots in the intestines, and by constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to the point of a spatulation or your nail scraping out the pus, which does not allow it to get wet; then treat it as much as it is possible, and if it cannot be scraped, then re-scrape it more forcefully until it is clean, and soak it in hot water; then treat it as it is healthy.
dou fremit	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Antor is a small appearance that must be removed from the chest, and it does not move an inch; and never has the patient felt any pain, and it feels like death's trembling, and comes throughout the entire body, and more hands than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is if you take a nail of a goose feather, or a feather of a vulture, and place that nail on the pulse, as long as the purple circle encircles the pulse entirely; then turn your hand over all the nail as you cover all around the pulse, and put it in its place, and pluck out the pulse from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, if I make this of a nail of iron or silver according to this form, and it is subtle and thin:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you do not perceive, but hold it with both hands and press it; and if you see, if you cauterize the pulse, as in this chapter of cauterization:
de la forme dou clistere	The form of the fire cautery
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never has a clistery been made of silver or archaut, or of melted gold or iron; and never has one been made of these stitches, both small and large, according to the size they are cut.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the fire clistery is small and large if it is made wide, or the belly is made in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a descent or the belly is lied, as you see, and the head is perceived; and it has one of the costals, and the other; and so the belly or puts the medicines into a vessel of a beast or parchment, and perceives all around the small pertus, and between each pertus I must have a spice, then bow in these pertus I weave the strong thread, then assemble the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is given, if the head is held by the instrument before a strong thread, then clisterize; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	1. And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or unguent of oak bark, or something similar, then gently prick it; then the physician uses his two hands lightly, as he can, then extracts the plaster, and softens the patient's legs at the wound, and if the medicine seems to help, then it is much better; and if the patient sleeps a whole night, then it improves even more.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if you are dislocating due to disease of the abdomen, and the physician is hurrying to help, then it returns as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hematoma is or cyst, whether it is the clitoris also subtle as in a child; and this is the form of a subtle cyst under the skin where the hair is pulled:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division of wounds care; and you will say the cures of hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the parts where they are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the point of the instrument, and the size and depth, or lance, or needle, or spear, or similar things; or they are made according to the parts of the body, as a wound that is made at the neck, or at the shoulder, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds on the shoulder, for the memory will come to your chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or the bone is not broken, if it is due to cutting or similar things, and the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of hemorrhage: if the head is healthier than the rest of the cranium, so if there is little blood from the wound, and the other part is healthy; and avoid the excess of wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not seem healthier, if the meat is anemic, and does not drink wine, and does not eat fat, and puts the wound on, if there is hemorrhage, apply olive oil or vinegar steeped in water only; and if there is no hemorrhage, if it puts on the wound, if it is fresh at all its source, and it is not moved by the air, dust, which I will say a little later; and if it has moved, if it puts on some poultices, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a spearhead and its surroundings, and the lips cannot be assembled by tents, if they can be assembled by stitching, if I say as belly wounds, by sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is discovered to be against the bone, and it can, and holds only by a point, like a nail; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore flesh in leather, and command the patient to eat large meats, such as testes and cooked flour, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you have true or leather for food, and it does not touch the bone, if the whole body is full, and grows weak, then cure it; and if arteries are in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be relieved by medicines, if you want the artery to stop, and if you loose the thread, if the thread is long; and if it does not profit, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	When these wounds are small and simple, if the cure is light: and it is that you place in this powder that smells like the arse has been moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take a part of incense; burn three parts of dragon's blood; three parts of live chalz, and the fine powder, and apply to the wound, and stretch it as it comes together with all its sinew; and then close it well, and leave it to drip, if it does not swell; for one does not waste the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And no time has it been done with just chalz, when one does not have incense or the dragon's blood, but that the arse has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is painful, then immediately do this in it; but use some of these powders: either digested ointments, or dough made from wheat flour and honey, until it bends; then continue with other cures as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	If the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then use fine tweezers to remove it; I will tell you more about this later for major fractures.
de la plaie dou col	of a minor wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes or goes and it is simple, but if there is no difference between the two and the collarbone or the artery is not affected.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the bone, and there is no other remedy than leaving it to itself and not putting anything on it, for it will pull out by itself; and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the bone is cold, and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the colder member; but if the medicine is bitter, like warmth in the face, and mixed with rose oil, and washed with warm water, and other piercings made in this way, and moistened ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, and the edges are not torn, then the cure as soon as it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	When the wounds are clean and the hair is long and full of bristles, if the cut or lower down the leg; and if the artery is closed, and the blood comes out in drops when it should, if it is stopped, and the lobe and the cauterization is done; and if the spine of the neck is closed, or the throat, and the conductor is kept, because the meat goes, if the throat is closed at the neck, and does not touch the neck but is returned according to its natural figure; then the strain is removed, and some parts are left, then the cure of scars is done as soon as it is healthy; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, if it wants to; and if there are pieces of bone, if they are smoothed out as much as possible, and those that cannot be smoothed out, if left, so that the wound does not become infected and becomes healed and allied to the issue; and if the wound is fresh, if powder is put on the powder that I said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If he has bone in the wound and there is an abscess, then the treatment is as I have described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of the arrow or the spear
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from an arrow or spear, and the wound is gushing blood, then look at the wound to see if the patient has lost much blood: then, if it is mortal, and the wound is fresh all over, then do not delay in putting powder on the wound as soon as possible, and do not leave it without applying more powder until the blood stops flowing, and raise the arm, and apply a compress to the wound; but if there is no powder, then put cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four hours, or more, until the spasms stop and the tremors of the chest are not felt; and when you see the bones in proper position, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat the wounds with remedies and other remedies, as long as they are healthy; and if they cannot be made healthy, perform surgery on them with sharp instruments that have been prepared; as is necessary.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is a cut with a knife or a thrust, and it is simple, or on the back, if the treatment is done by the person in front; if it is large, use poultice; and if it is small, use powder; and if it is infected, and it pusses, and the pus is drawn out with pieces of bone, if necessary; and if the pus does not come out, let the wound be left to drain, if the extractions are performed; and other wounds on other parts of the body are judged as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	A sudden and severe pain in the stomach.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The pain in the stomach is great and severe, and there are many wounds; the intestines are torn once or twice, and sometimes even more, due to the intestinal insertion. And the abdomen is more swollen, and never less than the small wound that the large ones cause, because we reinsert the intestines again and again; because the intestines swell so much that they feel the pain, if they return more often, and because it causes the other wounds, because the intestines are inserted in the belly as others do. And there are four ways to treat the pain in the stomach: the two common costures come from the costure of the stomach, and the costure of the other wounds and the two other costures that are common to other wounds; and all of them are more appropriate with the costure of the stomach, and I will say one by one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no inflammation in the intestines, and it is not a difficult matter to set, this is one of the two methods: either by the size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is compressed due to the friction.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is swollen, treat it in this way: moisten a sponge or a damp cloth only, or soak it in hot water and squeeze out the water, and gently massage the intestine until it becomes less inflamed; never forget to do this repeatedly, and it will become less swollen.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	When you see the inflammation departing, if the intestine of the stomach or large intestine and bowels are cooked, it is because this is alleviating the entry of a little thing; and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound in the wound with the instrument, and cover the edges with dressing; and the first cure is to cut off that part, which does not have to be cut for great necessity or not; and this is the strangulation for the incision: if it tears from the abdomen and does not cut, and see this form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine springs out, if you put it back according to its natural form in its own place, you will have done well, because this is what is needed.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower abdominal region, if you are able to make the patient lie on their back and raise their legs higher than their chest; and if it is in the lower abdominal region, then raise the chest and hips higher than the abdomen, and thus the wound in the one side will be higher than the other; and it comes to administering what I say about large and messy wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wound is small, and it is in the lower abdominal region, if you are able to make the patient lie on their back and raise their legs higher than their chest; and if it is in the lower abdominal region, then raise the chest and hips higher than the abdomen, and thus the wound in the one side will be higher than the other; and it comes to administering what I say about large and messy wounds.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I opened the intestine and it had been there for 24 hours, and the wound was 15 years old, and I treated it and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	The midwife showed them the wound that would rot, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat it with any remedy because I could not find any medicine, nor in the world; and I washed it more than twice a day with honey-water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or, you will tell me the two proper ways of sewing: take the needle, and thread it through the corner piece as close to the edge as possible; when it has perforated the right side, if the chief or the coast is thicker or thinner than the needle, and you have threaded the needle, make another perforation on the other side of the denuded part; and they understand this sewing if you do it as the tailor does the fur, and leave once the thread on one side, and take it back again until the seam is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, which Galen referred to as his own invention, is the most common and is used when no other method works. It involves aligning the two ends naturally and applying one thread loop to the other, in this manner: insert an awl or thread loop close to the end, and then perceive that one; leave the two thread loops; then turn the awl, and perceive through the part that is closest to the end, as the thread loops; then perceive the other part through the part that is closest to the end, using the other thread loops that are on the other side; and this is the most common method of sewing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	If the patient hears this advice and no one else gives it, they must sew the belly at the eyes, or as many as there are; and they must insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who have their wounds corroded; and when the flesh is rotten in the belly, it is the belly that is more painful than the other wounds.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	They judge the wound by comparing it to other wounds: and if you find the fresh wound all of its own color, and it has not moved, then you should reinsert the intestine and the bowel; then put some poultice of uncooked char on it, and if it has not moved, then put any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is bloody; and cut the thread, and be sure to sew the wound as tightly as possible, and check the stitching; then treat the wound as you would any other, until it is healed; and if you have no medicine, then put some on, as often as it gushes blood, cloth wet with vinegar, and mix it well until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no other skill in other positions than the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not communiteit as principal members, then it comes that you lightly oint with oil of temperate chalor, or oil of rose, and put on bandages, and remove the stings; and if there is pain or rash in the bellies, and often comes, if the clisterize of red wine German, and also the rash comes to the intestine; and the perce dedens, and saiches that when it is the big intestines, it is lighter to heal than the little.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "young" cannot heal until it is unwound, and this is due to the tightness of the veins that surround it, and the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to the nature of the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the gash is jumped from the wound, and it is reset as tightly as the intestine while it is fresh; and if it is large and turns black, then you must lie down the black part of the limb that is black, because it has veins and arteries; then deal with what is between the ligament, and pull the heads of the arrows away from the part of the wound until the extraction is pulled out when the gash jumps, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the bursting of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ruptured and the wound is small, if it can be restored with a few stitches, because I have seen that some were wounded or had an opening in their bellies; and this was the wound on the left side of the stomach, and it was infected and became a fistula, and therein was the egestion and the vents; I treated it according to what I could, and did not stop subtleizing until it was healthy, and I examined it.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it sutured, I doubted that the patient had no harm in his belly; but he had none, but he delayed better preparations, and did not eat or drink; and they said to no one whoever had a small wound in the intestine, that one must treat it in this way: take large testes, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the mouth has overturned the testicles, if you can pull them with the lips, then close the testicle; and then hold it there as long as it does not slip, and then make another fit in the same way that before, until the wound is entirely closed.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	1. If the end of the bowel is inflamed and causes no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a thread as fine as a hair from an animal, in this way: take the end of this thread from the bowel that is full of feces, and then tie it to the end of this thread and the thread of linen subtle thread, then pull the thread through the needle, and tie the intestine in the rupture; and this manner of stitching is not worse than according to the way of love and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the large intestines, if it does not heal or become healthy, then it should be as subtle as possible.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	It is said that all wounds and abscesses, when they heal, if they are called universally "fistula," and also if they are thin and have a narrow opening.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the belief that it is hard and filled with pus, or one feels pain, and is as thin as the tail of an ostrich; and never with a narrow mouth, and sometimes wide; and never small, and sometimes large; and I have seen this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and has no pus, it is only due to one of the eight causes: it is to know, by the small amount of sweat or corselet; or because of its malice; or because it has a hard crust, which does not allow the lips to char; or it has too many boils; or the lesion is porous and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or due to the property of the region being slow digestion, and slow health, and flees by nature; or it has bones or holes: and I have shown all these causes and their signs and cures with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	The following lines are the translation of the given Old French text into English:
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	1. If fistulas appear in all the limbs of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the small intestine, or the large intestine, or the bladder, or any of the costal cartilages, or the spinal column, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if a part that comes from the principle member of the limb is affected, and it resembles these.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	2. If all the fistulas of this kind are painless and only cause inflammation and ignorance; and if there is no fistula that does not come from the part I have mentioned, and you are a physician and you see it, then take a tent made of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, as you wish; and if the fistula is bent, then take a small tent made of silk, for the threads do not knot in the bend; and if the fistula is in the hands and you cannot find it by tents, then take a tent made of linen or iron from the part where the fistula is, because the moisture is always in one part and dries out in another, and then you will know whether it is bone or nerve, and ask the patient to tell you how much pain he feels when you press his hand with your own, and the leu or wherever it is that he feels the pain; and when you really know the leu or where it is, and whether it is far from the joint, the nerve, the artery, the vein, or any of the parts I have mentioned, if the cope according to what I have said, and then the fault and the corrupted parts that are densified will be removed; and then the cure, as long as it is healthy, and if the fistula is well bent in its proper place, then you should take soft tents made of medicinal ague and insert them into the opening of the fistula as far as the medicine corrodes the superfluity that has been exuded from the fount; and then take clean ointments made of healthy char, as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, then the cauterization is done as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then the cope.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	1. If the bone does not ache or the principal limbs do not suffer, as we have said; and if the head is discovered, and it has corruption and blackness, until the corruption is completely rotten, then the treatment of strange things is done as soon as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and the bowels are weak, as before, you should know that you are not alone in doing this: if dislocated, and you want to be at the root, and all corruption is removed, then restore the head; and if it is healthy, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	2. If the corruption is too deep, that you will not be able to come; if there is no other means than sharp pain in nature; and if it has little corrupted bone, and you pierce it with thorns, if the instrument is adjustable for this, and if it has many bones, do not leave any; and if moisture opposes you, and there is neither error nor fear, then cope with moisture and heat, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	1. If you do not operate on the wound within an hour, put something in the wound that will draw out the pus, and leave it until the pus is drained from the bones; and if it is large bones such as those of the thigh or knee, then only allow the corruption to set in as much as the blackness appears on the bone, then restore the wound; and if a large part of the bone is corrupted, and it comes out of the bone, then it is necessary to cover and close the wound completely to prevent further corruption, and then cure it as soon as possible; and I will tell you about a fistula that came into a woman's leg, so that you can use it as an example and help in your own practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The text describes the case of a young man who had a pain in his leg for a certain number of years, which was caused by an issue with his chest. The pain worsened until it reached his leg, causing a large abscess to form. The abscess kept getting bigger and more infected, turning into a fistula and causing multiple abscesses in the groin area. He was treated for two years, but he did not learn any skill in the art of hands during this time. I examined his leg and the medicines used to treat it, as well as the damage caused by the abscesses in his chest. His chest became red and he had a yellowish tint to his complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I sewed a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some went into another part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then tried to sew it, and found a piece of bone, and I discovered the bone was rotten and hollow; I knew this was from the rotten bone, and I wanted to make sure there was no more corruption, so I began to restore the wound with medicines for a long time, but I could not suture it; then I reopened, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I treated it, and then I closed the wound; but I could only do so when I found a piece of bone, and the hole was all around it, then I restored it with medicines; and it was healthy and healed quickly, and I did not want to reopen the wound again for fear of the pain of the surgeon, who could not endure it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For since the blood was often evacuated, but it was completely cured, and there was a hard char on the bone, and it was well positioned and had no harm or contradiction in any way, neither in the air nor coming out.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in no part of the shoulder, then it should be treated in this way: take the leather, and draw it up to the top of the head of the bone; command that it does not extend further than the first; then take another larger leather than the first, and tie it around the char that is out of the bone, and pull the char, so that you can see the corrupt char at the end, and if it does not bend the char, then put a bandage or a table on the bone to cover the corrupt char; and it should be treated as much as can be seen and felt, and then treated again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	When the bone is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in a large or small part, if you cut through the entire piece; then take the knife and separate it into parts, and so separate the corrupt part from the healthy one, and the healthy part from the corrupt one, as we have said; and when the corruption is in the joint, if the joint is rotten, and it contains another bone or not; and when the corruption is in the continuation of the joints, if there is no other thing than dough around it; and when the corruption is on the hand or foot, if it is very painful, but it does not matter what you do with it, as long as you seek to cure it, and make it open in all ways that you can, but do not let the bone or the flesh oppose you; and be careful of the incision and the wounds that cover the bones, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the bones, and their size and subtlety, and their growth and their decrease, and their hardness; and for this it is necessary to adjust each appearance of the tool to your will; and be careful that the work shows the tool you have used, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; if the tool you have used does not show according to what it should.
dou feu	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	1. And if the wound becomes infected when you are working, if you cauterize the wound quickly or apply some restraining powders, then return to your medicine as soon as it is completed, and tie the injured member with a safe knot, and treat it as soon as it is healthy; and I will tell you what happened to me in my youth: I found a black spot that seemed to be burning, and this corrosion came first in my left hand, which burned all of it; and when he saw the corrosion, if he could not cover the hand, and it became healthy; and later, after he returned with the corrosion or two hands, it came to me, and I put these things on the hand after circumcision, and I could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I cut his hand, but I did not want to lose hope of curing the matter; and I also feared that if I cut my hand, it would die because the virtues of the hand were weak; and he desperately returned to his land, and he covered his hand with dirt, and it became healthy; and I had no idea that this was happening because of another case, if they have such a skill.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	1. No time comes with swelling in the knee joint, and it takes a long time for a large gathering of bows to form; then they are cut and pierced, and in a jump, the bows are scattered, and the wounds that result are as delicate as silk, and do not reach the bone or nerve, and such disease is called "hernia," but if it is very long, it reaches the bone, and then it is called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone through the front, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is cut all at once, and at the same time when it is delicate, like silk; and it does not rot because of corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	1. If the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture and cannot stay in place, it must be reset first.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	1. When the belly is in its place, do not allow it to wander; and if you do not cover the patient's head with anything as you see fit, so that the belly drops to the lowest part of the body where it is, because when the belly is in its place, do not allow it to wander and if you do not cover the patient's head with anything as you see fit, so that the belly drops to the lowest part of the body where it is, then take consolidating medicines to help heal the wound, and put them on the cloth that covers the entire body; then cover the wound with warmth at the place of the largest wound in the other side, because there are bruises there according to the quantity of the wound, and put it there on the wound of the healthy part for alleviating the belly, and do not forget to adjust the great fold after once more; and he who is at the wound of the other side often wants to alleviate the belly, and looks at what comes from the belly, whether it is venom or little or much, or digested or undigested, and take care when the patient feels pain or numbness, and if it has apoplexy or not, and when your medicine has extended itself and you see the nature that jumps on the wound of the healthy part, if you look if the breasts have already set, and approach the wound; then leave the morning or evening, and when you dress the wound, if you change the other fold, and reapply the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not milked.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the venoms are subtle and short after a long journey, do not despair about your health, as your health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And if the poisons are subtle and short after a long journey, do not despair about your health, as your health is approaching. And if the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not milked. And if the breasts are delayed in healing their wounds and the contrary, and if the breasts are wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not milked. And if the breasts are delayed in healing their wounds and the contrary, and if the breasts are wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is advisable that the breasts are not milked. And if the cure of the poisons is subtle and short after a long journey, do not despair about your health, as your health is approaching. And if the cure of the fistula is delayed and the contrary, and if the cure of the poisons is subtle and short after a long journey, do not despair about your health, as your health is approaching.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Gangrene is an abscess that develops in the finger, either from a cut or nail, or by chance in other parts; and when it becomes inflamed, and is not attended to, if the abscess breaks, and spreads and blisters as it reaches the root of the finger, and by chance reaches the whole; and comes to corrosions around the bone, as soon as pain comes, and the head of the toe is large, and the color is changed.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, if you cover all the excess that is made from the finger, then cauterize the wound after.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. The cauterization is a great help when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the skin, and it begins to prick, and burn, then you should remove the tip of the nail that points at the skin, and cut it off high, and cope with the remaining part of the nail subtly and lightly, and put on the remnant of the nail with medicines that are ardent and corrosive to heal all; then the cure of wounds as long as it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	2. And if the corrosion is in the bone, if it pierces and turns over, because as much as the bone corrupts and becomes, so long it cannot be healed; and if you see the other corrupting, if you cope with it in the way said before, then the cure as long as it is healthy; and if it is hardened and cut off, and it feels great pain, then you should heal it first; then cope the nail with a sharp knife cutting across, and make sure that the nail does not pierce the skin which is far from the nail, because the patient will feel too much pain; and if it happens, then put something on which soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the dislocated shoulder
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The dislocation that occurs in the hands of some men by chance is quite rare, and by chance it can be doubled, and never once it can be broken, and no one is born in the root of the jointure, or the birth is in any of us of the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are not born with pain in the shoulder do not move, and those who are dislocated at the shoulder by chance move; the size of the one who is dislocated is lighter, in part: size it is like the root of a wide spatumile.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are dislocated at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold it tight with a cloth.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the case where the head of the shoulder is dislocated from behind, if you can first cover the joint with a clean cloth, then cover the bone with a suitable cloth, and then treat it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The causes that come are either from birth, or from wounds, or from burns, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you can cover the wound, if it needs to be repaired according to its natural forms; then put between two sheets or oiled cloths that do not stick together, or put between two pieces of fine linen as long as the wound is sore, just as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	The patient comes to none of its two with the hand if it is not hot enough, as it should be.
des vils	of wounds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Great wounds are swollen and full of melancholic superfluity, which come to more members of the stronger sex; and more often in the legs of those who go to prayer, work, and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must never administer any purge of colic, and then the proper dose of the basilicon.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is given in two ways: one is to follow the black blood, and to take the vein; and the other way is that you should tie the vein, and take it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	1. The length is as follows: first, the hot knee of great force is raised as high as possible, until the thick part is not subtle, then the leg is tightly wrapped around the cuxe joint of the part below the genital; then, the vein is cut in I, II, or III with a large size, then lift and tray the black blood to your hand, from one joint to the other, as much as the patient can bear without pain; then lie down, and command that it be painted with meat in black; and resume the evacuation and cleaning of the wound as soon as the veins are relieved, and do not hurt the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. The legs of the patient are treated as follows: trim the hair of the affected limb, if it has hair, then place it in warm bath water, and heat the limb until it turns red, and inflame the veins; and if there is no bath, then heat the limb with fire, and then cauterize the vein at the knee or in the ankle area; then apply leather to the wound, and scarify the vein from all sides, as soon as it is touched, until it appears red and black, and if it seems like a bloody cord; then boil the rait (a type of herb) until it is raised with leather, and then apply it to the wound; then scarify the leather along the vein as soon as it appears, and lay it on the healing wound, as you have done before, and then apply another piece of leather or more, if you have them, and lay it on the healing wound, and then tighten it, and apply it to the second tail (wound); then remove the tail from tail, as soon as it is all healed, and then apply the leather; and if you cannot lift or raise the tail, and an iron needle is inserted into the strong double thread, and the tail is laid down, and the needle is pulled out, and the tail is raised, and your hand is turned over and back, as many times as it can be; and keep the tail from catching fire, for if it catches fire, and it cannot be lifted or raised, and causes harm to the patient; and when you have treated the tail, then put a piece of linen cloth with fine hair in wine and oil rose; and cure the wound as soon as it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the visor is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then if you tear it forcefully, but do not cut it, and the eye so that we have mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron that cuts the visor when it is curved, and does not cut through, but only curves; and it is a large curve, because if it were too fine, it would cut the vein, but if it is thick as we have said, then this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the vein of the arm.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it may grow elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the skin that comes from the snake and goes towards the cors serpents, and it is found between the hide and the char.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	When the signs of the beginning of this wound are visible if it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes color, and begins to bleed, and like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound is opened if it covers a piece of plaster from one and a half inch to two and a half inches long, and the noes, and leave the plaster on the leg, and every time that it is not in place, if the noe covers the plaster, and the nowe; and if it is too long, if a part of it is cut off, and the noe is placed on the remaining part, and does not cover its root, until it is all out; for if you cover it, if it goes back into the wound, and brings with it pus and blood or the flesh, and the patient suffers from great pain or suffering; therefore it is necessary that it be treated as little as possible, and not remain for a moment more than necessary; and this wound when it is treated by hands of long or short, or X, and some hands came to me, with which it was X hands long, and when you cover it, if it bloats or turns black, and the perce jusc’a fons, so that all is well; and take the matter which is densified, and administered to the patient without food for a day or two, then the cure is like the apostemes.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And no time the vein hands rain, and moreover when it opens in the joint of the shoulder or shoulder, and there comes out pus, and which falls; cure the donkeys if we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of verses that are born between leather and skin
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our country "beef disease", because it often occurs in cattle, and is a small scar that runs between leather and skin, and goes up and down the entire body, and feels well at every joint, until it reaches the skin or the belly, and jumps; and it is caused by the food of some humors, such as snakes, lizards, and ascarides or worms in the belly; and one doubts its maliciousness, because when it goes through the body, it rises to the head, and returns to the oil, by chance enters, and destroys the oil; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the wound healing and closing, if it cannot be helped when the patient will: if it comes to pass that you read the leg and the bone from a far distance and well closed, then cut and pull out, and put it in the chariot, and do not touch it if it is cauterized by fire as it dies; and the greatest harm it does if it comes to the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, if it is drawn aside from it the scarform appears, then cut and pull out, and put it in the chariot; and it is necessary to use the physician's hand of medicines dissolved for the human humors for the poor, and avoid the flesh of enjambed animals as food.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from winding
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "worming" in our land, and is a pain that comes in certain members, and spreads from member to member; and I see what I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called a woman patient, and I saw one of my arms, and saw a small worm in the vein of the other arm; and afterwards, I saw it climb up as if it were a snake to the shoulder, faster than anything, as if living silver when it cuts through the flesh; the pain left that arm, and moved to the shoulder, and then a little later spread throughout the body, until it came to the other arm; and she told me that she dislocated beyond the other arm, just as I see.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvel at how it moves from limb to limb, as I have never wished for this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Indeed, I have always wanted to make sure that the pain moves from one part of the body to another, but I do not want it to be like this in women; and I thought that this was because the woman had dry skin, and the veins were exposed, and because of this apparent constraint of the ventosity; and I did not know that it is not true for those who are delicate and have moist skin and recovered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain, does it open as we have said, if the limb is stretched and held tightly, and then hold it until the constraint of the ventosity is gone; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it at your eyes, if the cure for those who have this constraint is like pungent pills, and pills of serapine, and similar ones.
des saiettes	The term "des saiettes" translates
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The sails are various, depending on their appearances and the wounds of the body or they choke.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of the sails is due to their varying points, sizes, and hairiness, as well as their angles, lengths, and pieces; and those that choke in any member do so in various ways: either in the principal members, such as hair, liver, spleen, lung, stomach, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	If the sail chokes in any member of these parts, and the sign of death that I will tell you later appears, it means that you should not remove the extraction of this sail, as death comes later in other positions; and if the sign does not appear to you, and the sail is not causing pain, then the wound should be dressed and cured.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	1. When the sign of a fractured skull appears, when the arrow pierces the bone, and the patient falls to the ground, it is when there is confusion, weakness, and dizziness, and inflammation and pain in the eyes, and throat inflammation, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting; and by chance it does not affect the nose or ears; and by chance it affects the speech and voice; and a sudden fall of the white, moist scarlet wound resembles ploughshares, and so it seems like a horse's snort; and if this sign appears, if you are under treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is still in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the shoulder when it is pushed or pulled is that it feels as if it is sticking out to the side, and it seems empty; and by chance, the shoulder stays still like the leg, and in a short time, dark blood comes, and there is cold and cold sweat, and syncope: then the signs of death appear.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arm that is not moving is that there are no signs of inflammation from the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the face turns pale, and he gasps for air and cries out in pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	When the shoulder is dislocated in the covering, if it affects the small ribs; and there is great pain and suffering, and the patient gasps; and all the members of the shoulder move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the dislocated shoulder is the stomach, by chance if it jumps from the wound, nothing indigestible of the meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the dislocated shoulder is the belly, and in a single jump through the small intestine, if there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the dislocated shoulder is in the bladder, and the urine jumps in a single jump and comes out, and the patient feels great pain: fatal wounds.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, if the face, neck, shoulder, spine, shoulder blade, back, and muscles, and the limbs appearing similar, are only according to other dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the flesh or artery, and it is not exiting, as I will tell you if I can, because you are making such a face.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I have seen one home a spearhead stuck in the root of the nose: I tried to remove it, and it came out smoothly, without causing any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I have seen a game where an arrowhead was stuck in the grease of the oil, and the arrow was removed, and it could not be reached further than the point towards the face, and it was as large as a Turkish bow, without causing any pain to the ear; the wound healed, and I have never seen any accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And there was a arrowhead in the throat of a man, and it was the Arabian arrowhead at the ears: I was the beard, and subtle as I could while I took it out, and it was safe for the man.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I took out an arrowhead from my home, which was either in the beard or the stomach, and I thought I would die; and then after 30 days, if it did not change its position, I cut under the arrowhead, sewed it up, and it came out, and there was no accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you have a home where a arrowhead is stuck in the back or buttocks, and it caused a wound to be formed; and the arrowhead did not come out easily, and did not change its natural positions, and did not find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if another man cuts himself on his face, and feels the wound; and does not immediately feel great pain; and does not think of other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And there was a wound on the face of a prince, the king, who had it cut by a sharp instrument and was swollen on the left side; and it was all puffed up. I was called for the cure after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If you find the wound to be very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried to open it with all my skill, and I did not feel anything; but I felt a sharp and painful sensation in my left ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow I placed the leg on the uneven surface, because the arrow did not fit; and it seemed to me that it was from the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I placed the bandage on my hands, and it soothed the right side of the wound, and delayed the patient's pain for a long time until he felt the arrow in his flesh; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied the poultice of the corrosive medicine on my hands, as it was overturned, and I touched it, and I felt the head of the arrow in the flesh; then I turned the overturned part of the wound with that medicine, until the patient's pain seemed to disappear; and it healed well within four months, and then it was removed when the stitches were removed, and I could not do it; therefore, I continued to refine and invent ways to extract, as soon as I put on the needles properly, according to the form that comes at the end of this chapter, as I draw and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	The shoulder joint is judged to be unable to heal: I will heal it therefore, and the wound was soothing the pain, and the patient became healthy completely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have said the quality of extracting some arrows, so you should apply your cure according to what I do not say, for the books cannot make everything appear dirty; but the masters of the arts know how to use well chosen things and the present and deficient ones, true veins, and sharp instruments, in descending from the things strained which come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come from the limbs or they are falsely stuck for according to two ways: either by the hand or they enter, or by another part; and the one that is thrown from the hand or it enters, it is an arrow that enters into the joints, and it has never been thrown once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	If she does not jump now, if the horse is not overheated and the jaws are not closed, then she will become unconscious and remain so until another joint is opened; and thus, she falls into the bone, and she cannot move if there are no other joints, and each joint; and therefore, she falls, and she does not fall if a subtle cut is made at the end of all the parts that are open, as long as the jaws are not closed, and then the tail.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the arrow is stuck in the bone of the chest, and it goes into one of the lungs, or any other accidents that I have mentioned to the patient: if he does not pull it out immediately, but leaves it as long as it remains calm after a joint, then the patient will die.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the dislocation is not caused by the bone alone, and does not cause any other injuries, and the patient has had no previous accidents, then the surgeon should intervene.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is not caused by the bone alone, and cannot be corrected, then the surgeon should immediately call for assistance; as I have told you. Then, treat the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the dislocation is not visible in the limb, and one cannot see it, and the patient wishes to try everything; and if you feel it, if there is no instrument available to reduce it; and if you do not have any force or skill to reduce it, because the wound is large and the limb is painful, and the limb remains painful even after the wound has healed, then reduce the dislocation as much as possible, and if the limb has ears that hold them, then use the bone that is causing the dislocation as a lever, and then break or crush the ears of the limb, until you can reduce it; and do it very gently, even though you may have broken the limb.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you do not do it once, if the bone is still wet until it is read, then pull it out, because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the dislocation does not move in the direction of the bone we have said in this chapter; and you are given an incision on the nerve and the vein, and you insert a needle as you please to draw out the arrow, whether it is quickly or slowly, or firmly or loosely; and you put the bandage according to the shape of the wound that the arrow made, because it is the greatest help that can be given, and if you do not, if you do not follow what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The patient feels pain in the shoulder, either from another cause or because the skin is too tight in that place, so it should be cut: as soon as the stitches can hold, it should be pulled out: if there is no further pain now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If the bone is held in place, if the hand turns around as it enters the bone, until it expands the bone, then it should be pulled out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot be extracted, leave it alone and continue the extraction as soon as it starts; if the arrow is in the wound, if it comes out of the wound, and if you see blood, if the point of the arrow enters the instrument's hair, then pull out the arrow and the instrument's point that enters the wound, to make the extraction easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrowhead is lodged, then you must remove the entire shaft or the venom if it is still inside. Then, treat the wound as best as you can.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the arrowhead is lodged in the chest, abdomen, or intestines, and it is protruding, then you must remove it. If it is still inside, then pull it out slowly, and then cut the vein and nerve, and then extract the arrowhead. Then, treat the wound as best as you can until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the arrowhead's points used to treat wounds is similar to the beak of an owl, and it looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are different ways of doing it: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed hair is similar to that of an owl's beak, by inserting it at the tip of the arrowhead, as shown in this figure:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tines for insertion and removal is similar to this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	of which the veins are common, and of which there are XXXI, of which XVI are the largest, that is to say: the two branches that are after the ears, which are called the "herbage" arteries; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and the veins that are in the two cheekbones, which are called the "aspirations"; and the vein that is cut in the forehead; and the vein that is at the base of the nose; and the guinea worms which are at the neck; and the veins that are in the lips of the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the veins that are on the underside of the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The first line of the text translates to: "The veins commonly found in each arm are V: one is the cranial, and is on the left side of the costal, and is called the 'grievous man's vein'; and the other is called the 'fast' vein, and is composed of the cranial and the basilar, and is called the 'grievous man's thoracic'; and the basilar is on the left side of the costal, and is called the 'grievous man's abdominal', and is located under the scapula, and is the one that is found in the arm, which is open manifestly under the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The savable part is the vein that is between the auricle and the anus, and if it rains; and in the leg and where the patellar tendon is, there are three veins: one is the coronet of the medial condyle of the femur, and the second one is called "sesamoid" that is in the medial tibial tuberosity; and the third one is the "nasse" which is in the lateral tibial tuberosity; and in the other leg, there are three veins similar to those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The salvation of the veins after the ears if aids in catheterization and migration; and the quality of the sainment, as I said, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and wipe the leu or the veins with a rough cloth; then the patient's face becomes stringy at the neck, until the veins appear between the ears in the two eyes depending on the head; then give the lancet, and cut through the vein jointly with the bone, then gently hold the hand over all the veins until you cope with the skin and the veins well, and make the incision as much as you can see; then you pull it and hold it until it is healed, and I have already said the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	1. The health of the two arteries located in the temples, if they are prone to migraines and pain, and habitual, and if the quality is such that I say: and it is that the patient draws in his collar as much as the veins open widely; and one feels the looseness of the skin on both sides, and then swells; then gently lift the key above the vein at your index finger, and cut the lancet, and gently raise the vein and the wound, as you have done in the other veins, and make sure to draw out the necessary amount of blood according to your need; then release the patient, and put your index finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton; and then let it form, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about their comfort and extraction, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The patient with the vein in front is as sick as the one with the cranial head, suffering from ancient face diseases, migraines, and bruising. If the physician finds that the patient's head is pulled back by twisting it, as the vein becomes visible; then take the instrument called "forceps," which looks like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and firmly hold it with your hand or another thing, and let the blood ooze out according to the quantity you see; then cut off the hair from the neck, and tie the vein as soon as it is safe and never once with a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Every part, it only needs the flame to be too big; and the right way, because the bone is near, and by chance the flame breaks when it is being subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The health of the two veins that are in the two arms if it helps them, and the shoulder, and the wound, and the orifice in the oil, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their health if it is that the physician pulls his neck twisting any ligament, as before; then the right way, and so the healthy one, a small part long and wide flame, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	If the flames are subtle, by chance they are very sharp; then make a deep cut, as much as you can manage, and then tie the cloth, and hold it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	If the wound is not deep and does not cause much pain, but is more like a scrape, and it is on the face, and there is redness and heat that comes with it, and it becomes more noticeable as it gets older; and if the cleanliness of the wound is not good, then strain the wound with your left hand, and take a subtle flame and touch it to the eyebrow that is between the two eyes, because the wound does not open well, and it will start to heal now; do not apply too much pressure, and make a deep cut according to your needs, then tie it for one night, because it is quickly restored; and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	1. If the patient has two children, it helps in the relief of labor, at the beginning of childbirth, and for various diseases, such as epilepsy, corrosion, and herpes, and warts; and if the quality of the patient is that the midwife tightly grabs the collar of one and the other, as we have said; and if the midwife is standing at the head of the woman, and the woman is sitting on the bed, then cleanse the vein of one long and widely, then drain the blood abundantly, as much as possible; then do another part in the other vein, then loosen the line, and tighten the veins gently so that the midwife does not strain; and leave it until the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the deer
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the lips of the deer if they help to close in the mouth, and corruption of the genitals, and cracks of the lips, and sores and throat.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health if it is to make the patient stand before you, and pull his collar as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the eyes, of which one is on the left side and the other on the right, and they are black because of their dark color and the thin dark hair: therefore, cut each one, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then cut the largest of each part, and do the same for all the eyes that are swollen and closed, because it is a different way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Of the health of the tongue if it is red after the health of the head, and it is at the gorging of the throat, and diseases of the eyes, and diseases of the mouth; and it is healthier when the patient has washed his hands before the sun, and he has cooled the tongue, and looks into each corner of a black vein: healthy therefore one and the other, and do not alarmed too much, for these are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The red veins that are usually healthy are red in two ways: either by pressing on all the fire with a wide flame, or by olive oil that is as fine as the trenching, and they are called "anesil"; and they are wide and fine according to the width and gorging of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the burned face is such that it is not named, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has the skill to open the flat veins of large blood vessels that contain large blood and cause problems; and this is the form of the burned orange face.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtle applied, and it is safer for the subtle veins, or if there is subtle citrin sang in them.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The salve of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are full of the throat, and the collar, and the stomach, and the belly; and it is necessary for the healer to make wise use of it, and to avoid the artery that is full.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	If the artery is pricked and blood comes out, if it can be stopped, then it should not be pricked more than necessary, but cut if possible.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the basin does not open clearly, if you pull it, and change to another one; or you do not want any rain on it, or you want to draw the vein from the arm: it opens clearly; and the flame is lit at the basin, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	If you see the vein of the patient flowing clearly, if you continue to pull the arm, until you touch the vein as much as possible; then sign the vein is full, and then release the arm, and cut the vein with the flame at the basin; and be careful not to hurt the artery when you see the vein swelling, because it is the artery: close the basin.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you see something emerging from the top as if it were a child's urine, and it is red and subtle, and it looks like it's not from an artery: then hurry, and put your hand far away, then press on the spot where it is not moving, many times; hold the shoulder, let go, and do not move the patient's arm; and be careful, and do not move it until it is safe.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it is not inflamed, and it is painful, and the doctor is not present, then open the artery if it seems to be open, because the head of the needle has retreated; and inflate it.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a scalpel from the fistula, and cut it, and take one of the halves and sew it well to the other; if it is not stained, that is good; but if not, then the cure, as we have said, with the powders that stain blood; and the stains are not more in other positions for the small wound of the wound, and the pain of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The health of the vein is in harmony when it treats the wound with blood from the head and chest, as we have said; and it is necessary for the physician to treat the nerve that is injured, and if it does not become too much, and it heals the nerve, and it becomes soft and healthy, and by chance cannot be healed; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open any holes for its subtlety, then it is necessary to cleanse the wound with the instrument; and remove the nerve from your body.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is blood flowing between the two veins, if it is long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment of the head if it helps, that it attracts blood from the head, and helps the eyes; and it is the best to touch with olive oil or warm iron, because it is the most safe of all wounds, because it does not harm the nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Indeed, it is best to make the bone lighter, and do not hurt anything the first time, and continue; and by chance, the bone may be found in some people, but it does not hurt anything the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your perception.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about health is that it is not acquired overnight but must be maintained for good health and to avoid diseases coming. It can be achieved in one of the three veins: head, fast, and basilic; and it should be done at the beginning of a patient's first dose, and again after a few hours or the next day, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The health that is maintained with diseases has no specific determination, but it depends on the amount of time spent in bed or nursing, in all hours and ten times; and it is not necessary to maintain good health for children until they are fourteen years old, and women until they are four months pregnant.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Necessity does not apply to those who have passed 60 years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	If the stomach becomes ill due to eating light foods, and if there is a tendency for the intestines to become inflamed, even if there are no excessive amounts of meat or wine, and if one does not have a history of colic or vomiting, and if the belly is distended and the woman's parts are multiplied, and if one does not have too much virtue, or from the arms or from traveling and waking and dining, and if one has the strength to endure all of this, then one should subdue the humors by eating foods and drinks and medicines, as I have said; then take a bath, and nothing will harm you, except for subduing the blood, and to become healthy from the inside out, and then work and rest and luxury and such things, and be loyal and loving, and be healthier than those who are sick, and rub your arms two or three times, and then draw them away gently, because if they are too cold or dry, you cannot bear it without; then rub your hands with a little oil, and then put your left hand on the part of the belly that is sore, and apply a little ointment made from fat to the wound, so that the belly does not become infected when it heals.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that run like cords to the healer, and if they are too many, as if they were made of wind, then when one puts on fire, it retreats from the fire, and cannot open the vein, and then it is one of these; and if it opens the vein, then it is the wound too tight, for then it comes to advise the healer in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, then it continues a little more of that joint or soon after, and if it is not bent, it is not bent.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	If the patient is short-sighted and the member swells, and it is left alone for one or two days, and does not tie the arm: by chance, pus comes out; do not bathe, then resume the cure if it pleases; and if the fissure is small, or the member is not cut subtly and you doubt that there is as much pus as you see, since it is so small in the fissure that the patient thinks it is not injured at all; and the wound heals quickly, otherwise, if the fissure is large.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the member swells and if you do not resume the cure with a little oil, since it softens the skin of the pus and makes it worse in this fissure that the oil lies on; and then apply oil to each wound that you cleanse the veins, to stop the course of the pus; and this itself causes triage and bowels to empty when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	If large abscesses appear, which come many times, and if it is not healthy to open the vein even once, or if the opening of the vein is small, then soak a soft sponge in cold water and wring it out, and stretch it for an hour; and it is necessary to do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if there is no black or greenish discharge at the site after several days, then you should not know it; and if you see, put nothing on aloe or mirrory jelly in water, mustard, or any similar substance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is gangrene and appearance of the health of the basilica: then place your hand on it, and if the limb is cold to the touch of your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not place anything on it that we have said, for by accident in the operation without cutting the artery; but I apply it dry to strengthen the limb, then another treatment, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each sore according to its quantity of virtue and color of the sore.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is black, let it be red as long as it is red; and if you see it large, let it be subtle as long as it is fine; and if it is too cold, let it be cooled.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	1. It is necessary for those who are in pain and far along, and have the skill of extracting poison, to make a larger wound, and use wide flames; and for those who are weak, the opposite is true, and they become healthier often, and it is made healthier by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of healing is saved from the spread of poison and nerve pain, and it is worth noting that the long wound is not wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	1. And for the one whose heart needs healing, it is necessary to give a thin slice of pomegranate juice; if it is inflamed, it should be drained three times or four times; and if it is of cold complexion, it should be placed before the thin slice of pomegranate juice in honey, or in aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cardamom, and a very fragrant honey.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If the patient feels ill after the evacuation of blood, if it is wet and has a pungent odor, and if other things are used as we have said in the division or chapter of sincope for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If he sees his arm swell and become healthier again, if it happens, when he is deprived of sufficient health, so that he becomes healthy little by little, according to the amount of his virtue that continues.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If he sees his arm swell after the first health, and if he is strong, if he becomes healthy within seven hours after the first health, or after the next hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one appears healthier on another part, then it must be healthier the next day or the following.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has blood to give the body which is already inflamed, and causes fever; if enough quantity comes out, and the pulse becomes rapid as it passes through the vein; then when you reward all the conditions of health, and put your hand on the cheek where the patient is healthy, so that the death does not come from pus in the vein, and this happens many times when the healthy ones are neglected; and it comes to pass when you see the arm grow cold and draw out the sang the second time, and the pulse is closed, so that you press on it; but if it is frozen, then extend the arm as much as it can be, for it would be wrong; but leave it as long as it is healthy the second time; or you do not touch the tip of the flame, until the cold that is in the vein has passed, and puts back the seal in the heat, and gently press on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, if it is left without being tightened and not stretched as much as possible until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw the blood a second time, if the vein is in the same arm or in another arm, or in the other hand.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy because it is composed of the bone.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of making it is if the patient has blood in his hand that is hot and red, until the vein is visible; then it should be tied loosely, if the vein appears well, then the hand should now pass through, not too wide or too long; and the wound should be large, and the hand should be clean near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be cleaned, it should be reinserted in warm water, and allow the blood to flow into the vein as much as possible; and if this is the case, do not heat the hand in warm water again, because it will cause more harm than good; and the wound of this vein is safer than all other veins, because it has not been cut or burned.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The patient with the saved hand of the right hand is suitable for all diseases of the abdomen, and this is the way: tightly wrap the hand, apply hot water, as long as the vein is clear, if it passes; and if it is not severe, cut through it completely, and do not cut too much, because the flesh is dry and lacks moisture, and then put the hand in hot water, if it does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated enough blood as your skill allows, if you put the vein oil and seal it firmly, and then make a knot for each rain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The patient's hand that holds the remedy is most suitable for treating mouse disease, and I do everything as I have said for the other hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The remedy of the soap is suitable for all diseases that are unpleasant to the body, such as diseases of the lungs, retention of fluids, and disease of the legs, and old wounds, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of the remedy is such that if it is applied to the patient's skin, it can help reduce fever, and rub the vein as soon as it appears, and press the joint around the piercing; and if the wound is at the ankle, and through the piercing, then the rain goes out of the leg; therefore, it is safer to have a larger rain, either at the ankle or in the leg, than what was previously thought.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you have healthy children from your beloved spouse, and the health of the child is not good, and it wanders about as in coping; then the flames are extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if you cannot have children from your beloved spouse, and the wife is pregnant again, and the wound of the vein is well-healed; then leave the vein alone.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the healthier sister is first married, and then the second wife returns again to a smaller portion because her husband is salt; do not doubt the other wife, as we have said, and now make a sop for the other sister equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The first line of the translated text is: "The pain in the sciatic nerve is at the ankle, and its cure is in the relief of the toothache, when it is due to blood evacuation.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	The second line of the translated text is: "And you assess its quality if it is that the patient is in or out of water, and tightens the ankle IV times by twisting, as otherwise will not open the vein; and if it opens, then the pain in all ways you can, and passing through; and it is best to close it, because the wound is saus, and it is mout reponue a mains homes.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	The third line of the translated text is: "And if you do not close it, then no rain can enter the wound that was opened or closed, and to the little toe; and make as much scar as you see, and then cut the string, and put on cotton and tighten; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	Of childbirth pains
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horns, or of iron, or of bone; and ventosation is performed in two ways: either by cutting and pulling out blood, or by cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventosation which is made by cutting is done in two ways: either it is all on fire, or on fire; and ventosation which is made by cutting and extracting blood is made in twelve degrees of the chest, of which one is the chief; and the others are in the col; and the others in the costeis of the col; and the ventosation of the chin; and the ventosation of the shoulder; and the ventosation of the elbows; and the ventosation of the knees; and the ventosations of the ankles; and ventosation does not touch any veins, for only small veins that are scattered in the chest, and therefore no one can suffer from it like a sickness of the veins; and it is only necessary that it be maintained, neither on fire nor on any fire, in no disease that comes from repletion, as long as the chest is dry.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	1. And if necessity from illness comes to ventilate, or for habit's sake, if the attendant each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and also in every ten; for there are those who, when they have to ventilate, have a heavy burden; and if such as have fullness and bruising in their face, and in their chin, and at the collar, and are pale; and those who have a gout of blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and spit blood; and if there are such as have a heavy burden, and see only blood, and fever, and death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and also when it is mid-month, we order them to rest after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The salve for the head helps to alleviate the pain that comes with it... only if it is after the evacuation of all the cold; and this rest is in the care of the physician for the head, and only those who are of a cold complexion or have been chilled, because this does great harm; and therefore only the watchman in use, or those who have cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often become ill, then become obligated, and therefore it is necessary to shorten the rest period due to the fear of obedience.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	1. The ventilation of the neck is in the lower part of the throat and the chest, and for this reason it is useful in relieving pain, congestion, and tightness in the chest, and shortness of breath; and it is recommended to be done gently, as it can cause discomfort or stomach ache or abdomen.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	2. The ventilation of the neck is useful in relieving pain in the collarbone, and it eases and relieves migraines, and it helps with strangulation, and it alleviates pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the lower part of the chest; it is recommended that you command the patient to express their hand when putting it on, so as not to hit the artery, and not to cause further harm.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The head of the patient is cold and wet, causing the dislocation. It cannot be moved easily, causing great pain and injury. The dislocation must be reset as soon as possible to prevent further damage.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The cold and wetness of the shoulder joint causes inflammation and swelling, which can lead to serious health problems if not treated immediately. The affected area must be treated promptly to prevent further complications.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The cold and wetness of the shoulder joint can cause similar symptoms to those of the elbow, such as pain and swelling. The patient should avoid using the affected arm too much to prevent further injury. The doctor should also be cautious when treating the shoulder joint, as it is a sensitive area with many nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The first line of the text translates to: "The suction that is used in childbirth if it causes great pain and diseases, and it is necessary that the suction be large and sharp, so that it can effectively draw; and by chance, if it is too subtle, it will break; and it causes many wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The second line of the text translates to: "The suctions on the legs are healthy when they open widely, as they draw blood from the entire body, and relieve old pains from rheumatism, and gout, and bladder, and stimulate the flow of womens' fluids; and they are located in the groins and thighs, and they weaken the whole body after long use, and cause pains in many positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	1. The manner of applying the forceps if you put it first empty, and then again, and move it gently, and continue doing so until you see the red and swollen lobe, and open the wound for the blood to come out; then wait, and reinsert the forceps, and prepare the position of the cors (ear) because some have thin ears and small pores: if you manage to injure once, and make large wounds, and a few porez (pores), and then lightly squeeze.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	2. And if it is not big, if it gets injured twice: the first time by making the vein narrower.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it does not come out quickly, it may be wounded a third time; and when we want to draw out little blood at a time, we only manage once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to draw out blood, we often return; and if it does not come out quickly, if it is firm and resistant, and the ends are perceived softly, and those who have thick skin and hard bones, and who have scars, you should rub the handles of the olive oil openers with essential oil: if this is the case, with olive oil purple, or with honey-scented almond oil, or with sesame seed oil; and if it is wool, with cresson oil, or with lis oil, or with chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, then take olive oil, or balsam of Hermas, or olive oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is healthy and has large pores, it should not be oiled, but it should be washed after the application of vinegar of rose, or cold vinegar, or mushroom vinegar, or vinegar of porcelain, or other similar substances.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have moisture in their mouth, if they rise from silk, or vinegar of mustard, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those who have excessive superfluities rise from wine viel, or from ague of the sweat, or from decoction of anet or chamomile, or from other similar causes; and they do not become healthier by ventouse before bathing, but after bathing, an hour or two; and they do not sleep after ventouse, and they must wake up when it is time to ventouse and when they are ventosing.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And if those who are healthy become ill due to cold, and they are too hot and inflamed; then it comes that they crave cold things, such as apples, endives, and lettuce in the ice, and similar things; and they drink pucins, and char de chastron, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	1. And those who have a cold complexion, if they press honey syrup, and wine odorant moien, which is between viel and noveil, and mix little, and mix puddings and small oysters and pigeons; and when they will vomit, it must drink more than mengier; and it is necessary to give some men once a triaicle or muscate before the vomiting, or afterward, to comfort the principal members; and it should be subtle, but it only applies to those who are chaut le boivent.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	1. The wounds that are made to hurt are those that are made above the liver, and above the spleen, and the foot, and the belly, and the bowels, and the gall, because this member does not suffer much pain outside of the body, and only feels it when it is attracted by the sanguine member to the other; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we do with vomiting on the belly and the bowels to alleviate the member; and to relieve the pain when it has opillation or piercing, if it is attracted by its own virtue to the opillation, or if it leaves the piercing of its loins; and then it is made according to what is put in the liver and the spleen when it has retained ventositeit, and these vomitings are administered empty to suck only; and they are never administered together with fire, and never with aqueduct tede, as in diseases that cause pain in the pleuresin, and in such a way that one fills the vomiting with hot water, or with what has been cooked herbs, according to what.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the vacuum device administered by fire is:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two palm-wide halves of parchment, and has a small pertus on either side of the first petit, as if to poke an needle, and is of iron, with a point facing forward so that it does not scratch the patient's shoulder when inserting it into the member; and in the middle has a groove of iron or steel for a threader to be held, and there are large and small ones according to the disease and the age of those who take them, because the vacuum devices of children are different from vials, and thin than fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	The text translates to: "And it must be placed on the wound in the member: take the lead or liniment, and insert it through the vertex of the wound that has been made, so that the lead does not burn the patient; then place it on the member, and you must place it on the pulse points that we have mentioned, if you see, if there is vapor coming out, and you will remove the lead; and take the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you can.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the wound where it is administered to a patient with pneumonia, all the verges and pulse points are absent, and it is not in a state of fever until the patient becomes feverish, and it is placed on the member only at that time; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	1. Withouts are not removed except in parts where one can put a glove, such as the lips and genitals, and similar parts; and in these parts, if they are swollen like char, such as dogs or cats, and other similar parts. And if the quality of the user is that when you find swollen parts that are in soft waters, take them and put them in a gentle water, as long as they are not pregnant, and have nothing in their bellies; then it is healthy for the vein and the wound, then clean the member as much as it is red, and put on the withouts; and when they are flat and smooth, if it is the hand or one can put a glove, put it on, because it is after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then lift the leg of ease, and then the stiff one; and if you find it too late after the corset of the loose ones, then dip your hand in cold water, and put on as many as the loose ones are tightened; and if the loose ones multiply, then put on vitrol or gas, or similar things, until they are tightened; or you can cut the leg of half-burned legs and leave them as they burn to the leg, if it now sticks; and if you have more of these, then take more loose ones.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the loose ones do not take hold, then wet the leg of sacred water, or take a needle and thread it as much as it needs, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the sacred water, if they burn; and when you see that they are cherishing, then powder some aloe and silk or charcoal, or smoke, if they now cherish.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of wounds.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it treats of wounds and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Therefore, I advise you, dear reader, that you should not believe that this chapter contains nothing new, as you will not find anything in the ancient books, nor any letters; and for this reason, science has been neglected in our country, because I have found no one who knows it; and I do not know anyone who has studied it, except through the science of the ancient books, or by experiment, and by habit in my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the stumps that are amputated, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say this is the introduction of this book, the words and chapters, and the patient understands them, and learns the truth, if those who have experienced it can teach and learn this noble art, and teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that if there is any fracture, dislocation, twisting, or tightening, and nothing else helps, if it is not too weak, nor too faint; and if you hold it is not very tight, nor too loose; and if the hands are cold, it is to know that cold joules, and char of hare and deer, and do not drink wine, nor eat few lean chars, and do not fill the veins with blood too much, until you have no doubt of apoplexy chaut, nor expansion of matter in the member; if it swells again under the same government as it has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to remove the meat that causes great swelling, or if there is viscosity, like wheat cooked in hot water, and tests, and pies, and pancakes made of wool, and cheese, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the swelling that is recovered, the fracture gets worse and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And you advise that the bones broken and cracked cannot be well recovered or stitched according to their nature due to the weakness of the limbs, and those who are too soft; but if it is not cured, first reset the large tendons that were torn and joined with the member, as much as before; and do not wait for a long time, and for this reason it is necessary to stop eating large amounts of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	The treatises of the physicians declare that there are many ways to break bones.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the arm or leg, and I will tell you all the ways of fracturing in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that occurs when falling, and another when struck, like the size of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each fracture has its own way and instrument for restoration, according to what remembrance comes to the patient's mind; and it is the fracture of the bone that is caused by the bone being twisted and widely opened, and pressed with the hand; and if it is not twisted or the mallet does not feel much pain, there is no fracture, but it may have a twist, a fissure, or a small crack.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you can only move it with your hand, but put the medicine that comes after, and then pull it gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And you should check the fracture that will occur in the bone, and the two parts that are separated, they should be adjusted now, unless the wound is bleeding; and if the wound is bleeding, then it should not leave any part, as long as the wound is calmed; then it should be placed evenly and gently in the hole that you can hold lightly and wisely, and you should check that the restoration of the bone is lighter than the restorations of other bones or if they have pieces; then the extraction, if it comes after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	When there are broken pieces in the bone of the foot, if they are two parts, it is hands or fingers, or a part of your hand that is some small members, or two tendons, or one tendon and your hand; and put the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are aligned, if you adjust with your fingers the additions in their place in the muscle that you push, and keep that there is no pain or injury to the patient's bone; and straighten well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And it feels good in your hand if it seems that it is not well: if it curves beautifully and is not strained too much, do not press as much as those who come by their own experience, such as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	When the member is at its end, if the patient well controls the helper that it does not move, neither by watching nor sleeping nor turning, nor in any other way; and be well that the member is firmly held so that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it does not feel any pain, if it is not at its end, and it is necessary to put the member in order so that it does not feel any pain; and keep it straight so that twisting does not come until it is restored; and the quality of the broken member is according to what I say.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	I advise that the broken member is various in smallness and in size and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For if it has eaten members, like bread and butter and similar: if it comes with rolled-up linen cloths and subtle things; and those that are large, like a large bandage and thick rope: if it comes with a wide and hard rope, for the large bands tightly encircle all the great member, and draw it evenly, unless it has no joint; then it is lightly bound with loose knots, three or four times around the member, and the hand is tightly tied once for each part of the member, then go to the end of the fracture and draw it less, so that the fracture is slightly moved a little part of the healthy part, then take another bandage, and turn the other end towards the broken part; then return to the part opposite the fracture, and draw it gently, not too tightly or too loosely, as we have said in the first part of the fracture; then place the rolled-up linen cloths or ribbons between the bandages as they are even, and then tie everything with a bend, and if it has not swelled or inflamed,
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	If it is infected or gangrenous, if one applies something soothing to the gangrene, which alleviates the infection and leaves no marks; then one should press on the wound, and it should be of half a wide, well-cured cainne (cane), or of fust (dried bark), or of rains (raiments) of palm, and it should be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	However, it is necessary that the thing that is put on the wound be larger and broader than the others; and it should also be as long as it is needed for the member of small or large size; then press on the wound as you did in the first place, then tie a thread around it as you did in the first place, until it is tighter; the further it goes, the less; and the thread must be clean, not too thick nor too thin, and be of linen; for if the thread is too thick, like the works of the fools who make their lingers of linen threads, it is a great error, because the wound cannot be as tight as it should be if it is too fine, and it only serves to have less space between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is cut by the sharp edges of the stones after being washed with water, if they are not covered with linen or cloth, so that they do not freeze.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the tweezers, and the hair is broken, I will tell you the treatment for this after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should not try to pull out all the broken bones at once, as it is dangerous.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not recommended to put stones in them immediately, after 4 or 7 days, or according to your strength; and as was done by the ancient surgeons to restore fractures, dislocations, and twisting: and that you take flour that is between the husks of the mill, and knead it with a lot of water, and make this dough, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way to restore fractures in other positions, as well as for women and small children, because it is not too hard or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	1. Another way to mend fractures and dislocations and twists: take barley, linen, gum arabic, and Arabian rubber, in the ratio of 20 parts; mercury and aloes, in the ratio of 5 parts; alechil, in the ratio of 18 parts; and grind them into a powder, mix with honey of soap; if the complexion of the face is hot, use this plaster as it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	1. Another way to treat twists: take Arabian rubber and muguet, in the ratio of 20 parts; mercury and aloes, in the ratio of 5 parts; acacia, in the ratio of 6 parts; arsenic ointment, in the ratio of 1 part; mix well, and cook with water or honey of soap, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to mark joints and bones are their levers, and soothe the pain that follows, and the strength of the bone: take new linen, and the oil and lard cooked, and place it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore flesh, but it is necessary to soothe the post-surgical pain and the true bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to make plasters that repair broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and earth oak leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make plasters for the repair of bone fractures and to help with the recovery of post-surgical pain.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	1. Take the root of mugwort, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of wheat, and each part; and grind them, and mix with wine, and apply to your skin, and rinse with fresh coriander water or with any other water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	2. Another way to apply it more frequently than the first, when the wound is firm, comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	3. Take the roots of mugwort, and linseed meal, bay leaves, honey beeswax, and violet and chamomile flowers, each part; grind them, and mix with salted or sweet water, or wine, according to the health of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that it is not recommended to apply anything on the broken bone to restore its strength, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too wet nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems that Galen suggests that on the broken bone to restore, one should apply things like dry and warm substances such as mustard and aloe, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to relieve the wound and pain: take some ointment and powder from the tails of rabbits or the feathers of geese, and vismallow, and seal it well, and the limbs, and apply it to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain in his joints or bones; if it does not happen by hand pressure, and pain comes to the joint or prickling, or swelling, if you hasten, and release it, and now the plaster is applied; take a light damp cloth, a sea sponge, dip in cold water, and immerse in cold water, and raise the limb until the prickling stops, and soothe the pain; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, smooth with cold or rose oil, and put on a bandage as soon as you are sure of no aphasia, and let the inflammation in the member subside, and soothe the pain, then resume gentle massage and a little plaster, and do not strain it too much; gently until it is healthy again.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the wound is gushed with blood and there is pain and swelling, and it is inflamed all over, and you have skill in plastering and bandaging, if it recurs, as you did at first properly.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if you see that the wound does not bleed as we have said, if it does not ooze for more than three or four or seven days; and never more than twenty days, as we can see, until the break is healed and approaches the bone; then the restraint should be greater than before, and the tissue should enlarge, as I have said before; and if you see the wound becoming drier than it should, do not let anyone touch it, but instead apply hot poultices every time you deslime it, and every day, and place a piece of cloth over the member; through this means, you can cut out the pus from the wound, and stop the pain that the flesh causes: this is harmful, and if it does not improve, and I see no other way than to cause more suffering and to do it more correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various kinds of wounds
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are various kinds of wounds, and different shapes, and the causes are assigned; for there are wounds made by the thrust of a spear, and the bone is cut all the way through the bone, as if it were a knife or a blade; and therefore this kind of wound is called "cut" or "stab.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	The spear strikes the bone through different senses, and this kind of wound is called "absolute" cut; and these are the wounds of those two great or small gashes.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is a thrust embedded, or cut, or from the bone after the piercing, or from the other side of the piercing, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a persistent fracture, which draws the skin that is loose from the bone, or it is under the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	If the wound is healed in the bone as well as under it, and is a small cut, and for this it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound is made by injury, or by piercing, or by seeming thing, and lets enter the piece of the bone, and is the same size as when they entered the heating irons; if it enters through the pierce.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And there are more cases than those with dry bones, just like that of a child; and they occur in all these ways of fracture that are lightly broken, just like these; and I will speak about this in their language.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us consider all ways of fractures by the methods used for them, and by the corrupt char that is used.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The apparent appearance is known by the fact that when one has discovered the bone, and froths with their hand, if the dark fracture is open.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, keep in mind as many accidents as possible of the midwife, and if you see no such accident, then like vomiting of cold, admission of understanding, extension, flexion, congestion, fever, and the wounds turning red and swelling, and other symptoms in various dispositions, if it cannot be cured with doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see an unexpected accident, and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the first pain comes to you, and it is in the shoulder, then it is necessary to stop the movement of the bone before the fourth month at the muse.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If this is the case, and you stop the movement of the bone before the ninth month, then the tendon of the bone will be corrupted, and the accident we have mentioned will come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	If the fracture of the bone comes just before the tendon, and it is necessary to cut the part that is broken, then it should be cut in all the ways you can: the head of the chief of the mutilated patient, and the figure of the wound more than you can imagine, and if the blood comes out to reveal the bone, or if an apothem is caused, then help what is necessary, and if the wound is oiled with soft oils, and the plague is calmed and secured, then the plague should be stopped, and the bone should start moving again, and it is done according to twelve ways of mutilation: one way is when you cut at the end that is narrow, and it is in this form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then, cut another piece of the same size as the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is if you have many different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron; and you can shape them lightly without damaging the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and brittle, then it must be perforated through, otherwise, you must sharpen the edges with files, and do not make them too pointed so they do not pierce the bone further; and you should have more files, so that each time it fits in the bone socket according to the bone's shape; and this is the form of the three methods of files:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	1. The quality to perceive the broken bone is that you place your thumb on the bone, and turn it until you feel the bone is perceived; then put your thumb back another part later, and then do everything around it, then cut the incisions in the bone that is between the points, and do it as gently as you can, and lightly, as we have said, as you draw the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that we have like needles, tweezers; and keep from touching the brain or the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perceived and cut the bone, if the wound covers the other instrument that seems like an incision, but it should be thinner and more gentle than the other incision; and if there are no small bones or scales, if the light bones are gently on the instruments; then cure the wound with tents and needles that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way to open is if it is like the Galenic method, which is more correct; and the larger incision, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, where the open fracture is visible, so that when you have removed this part, if you measure from the top of this incision, the form is:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut too much, and the part is turned towards the bone; then make a small incision, if you lightly cover the entire bone, and take good care of the cloth that is loose; if it is near the bone, if the bone is lightly touched, because it is sensitive to injury, and causes pain.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	When the bone fracture does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only crushed by itself, and it has small pieces, if they cover the rough edges, and smooth the scales with a subtle rasping tool that you must have various quantities of, to adjust each joint according to the degree and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you shave in front of a coarse rasping tool, and then use a more subtle one, and continue doing this as much as it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In all other hair removal and subtle fracture treatments, it is necessary to adjust according to its direction; and this is something that cannot be reversed for the one who has studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	When the scar is discovered, if it comes to pass that you pregnant the wound with linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and the ointment in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another doubled bandage of II or III, and the ointment in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first bandage; and do this more gently than you please, so that you do not burn the scar, then apply other linen, and do not strain it as much as it pains the wound only; and leave it for I day or II, until the inflammation is appeased, then remove it, and apply medicines as follows: roots of lis, flour of times, powder of incense, aristolochine, and similar things; and make powder from these things and put on the wound, and apply further medicines without sutures; and wait that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave on it the ointment, or assemble bowels, for if bowels are assembled on the bare skin, they will cause great harm to the patient; for if one puts something mouthing on the wound, it causes great pain to the patient.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Preparation is necessary, as no accidents come to the patient if we follow what we have said, if it is doubtful, then there is doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no harm comes from the medicine we have put on it, which has its virtue, then you should apply a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and a drop of glue, and then cover it with a drapel; then cure it in ways that are suitable for the wound, as long as it is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Scars that have never been broken are the two parts of the bone that were not cut, or only one, because they are two bones; and this is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then becomes healthy.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	If one of the two parts is broken, then you should cut off your small finger or toe, and make the break as even as possible on your index finger, and in the pouch as long as it follows its natural shape; and do this lightly, and let the patient feel no pain through your touch.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the break is in the part of the toe that is not the big toe, and it cannot be brought to the heel, then you should put it as even as possible at the end of a thick finger.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If the break is in the second part, then you should repeat the first step, and if you can restore the first joint, do so; if not, after the ninth or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then cut off the toe at the end of a thin finger, if the break is in a part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	1. If you cut at another part, it will be; and let the wounds be as large as they fill the cavities.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	2. And no restorer would say that one must soothe the wounds with butter, and each one will die.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	3. It seems to me that it is well, but the wounds must be smoothed with a confection of ouef and molin powder; then leave the wound, as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilage is firm.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	4. And never cut on the neck of the wounds, and if it is the first time you have a hard wound, and it holds the breast, and smoothes the pain with a whisper; or as you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess forms at the site while you are working, and it comes to the point where you put on a cloth or cotton cloth greased with rose oil, or in a small vial of laver.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess does not come, then put on ointment made from flour of bread and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put on light sponges, and do not seal the wound; and if the wound in the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, if the pieces are able to be sewn together, then sew them up, and treat the scar with poultices and ointments, as plasters and ointments are able to be used for this; and if there is no wound on the nose, then treat it with compresses and put on needles, as long as it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the dislocation of the lower jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the lower jaw is dislocated, there is no wound, and the fracture is not deep, but only slightly so, and it is not broken into pieces, but rather bent slightly, which can be corrected with a slight effort.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, to place your index finger in the patient's mouth of the surgeon; and if the fracture is on the left side, then place your index finger on the left hand, lightly press the fracture, and fix it with the other hand, and hold it steady.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	If the fracture of the lower jaw is described as Level II, and you intend to provide extension to the second part, as long as it is equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If the teeth are moving or fracturing, and they are caused by a gold, silver, or silk thread, then take the broken lower jawbone and place it on the ceratoma, and place one double cloth roll; and place the double cloth roll on the upper part of the jawbone, according to its size and width, and tie it with the string you have, and instruct the patient to rest, and give light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	If you see that the figure changes, and then return to the same point where it was; and apply plaster with a lot of flour or wheat flour, after you have osteit the ceratoma; and apply a lighter plaster on it, and when it sets, do not change the position of the patient, as long as he is healthy; often it is healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the wound is infected, then it comes to the attention of the physician, as we have often said.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, it rewards a small piece of the bone in the head; if the bones are slightly crooked, they can be straightened.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is wide, it should be stretched according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have all these pieces of bone, and there is none in vain, if the wound is wide, and it is large, and you put on flexible dressings, for mending it as much as possible, until it is healthy.
de la forcele	Of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks multiple times in front, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and severed in two, and it has pieces, and it is the lighter one to restore; or it is a break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the incision is when the break is sensation of wound, that you have two assistants, if the one marks the forceful break; and the other extends your col towards the part; then place the cut equally in your two, so that it forms as it should, and has no appearance or change.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you are skilled at extending, then place the shoulder of the patient against the assistant's shoulder with a round or flat piece of cloth or linen, and it should be large according to your need; and hold and gently apply force, and draw the sphere towards your hand so that you can place the cut equally, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you do not take the head of the strong one away from its place, because it comes in front, then the patient will feel pain on their hateful side, and put their elbow or shoulder down, and bend the spine of the strong one as much as the bone of the strong one is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture to your two sides, and if you break the pieces, then it is better to let them go; and take out the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined by any overhanging part, but that you put the strong one aside from the one you have broken, but that you put the strong one away from the instrument, to warn the face:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	1. It seems like a spoon, and is not too thin, and should be as wide as it can be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the will; and if there are two, as you see, and one is broad, and the others are narrow, if it is the swelling of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of the dislocation, if the wound is small, or you doubt the dislocation, if you use the wound with cloth and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	2. And if aphrodisiacs are used, and it comes, if much oil is needed, and linseed and mustard, and wine, and put on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	1. The thickening of the bone is when it feels pain and pressure, it is that you apply to the bone powder of fine flour and pepper of hen's egg, and light splints on it, and a small ball of lead at the center; then take a very large bend of a palm leaf, then double the splints over the splints, and press; then take a subtle third of three inches wide and long, and wrap it around the bend, so that the bend's end remains; and put the splint on the wrist, and turn the bend on the collar, and tighten the saddle, and tighten the malady's healthy one, and tighten the malady's unhealthy one; and tighten each part, and when you see that the break holds the wrist, and you see clearly that the splint does not move from the bone break, if each reward is clear, and when the limbs are loose, then raise the malady on his back, and put it when he sleeps a small orillier of lead on the saddle, to lift the helper up; if you align the break of the force with the alignment of the shoulder blade, or you pull the arm to the collar, and it does not slip out of accident, just within 20 days; then resume the pressing, if you see that it is suitable, and draw it and leave it as it is, until it is restored; and it is restored in 28 days, and less than any man.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the injury to the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the shoulder bone breaks or the arm becomes unstable and does not return to its original position, and it is not due to touching, then: if the humerus follows the shape of the fracture, and the arm is realigned according to its natural form, in all possible ways that you can; then put some powdered sulfur with a lot of urine on the shoulder, and light spices, and put a large and thin plate, a little wider than the shoulder, and if it fits well, then use linen threads to secure it; then pull tightly on the entire shoulder, so that the plate does not move from its place, and look at it every hour; and whenever it loosens, if it is pulled, and places the plate as far as it can from its original position, and grip the pain on his chest; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25, and when these numbers are completed, if it heals, and you are patient, because this is only what is lightly set.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes before, and there is no sign of inflammation, then it is done, and the bone, and we do what we have said in the fracture of the force of reducing the swelling of the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the bone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is never broken in its environment, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the joint.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken outside, if it is dislocated, and it feels great pain, and there is lack of blood, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and the wounds are opened in the broken bones, and it feels well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And when the restoration is that the patient has fallen on his back, and places the chest between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the costal cartilages of the second ribs in your hands, and subtly puts them equal to all ways you can, as long as the bone appears to be so that it should; then places emplausters and stitches under the soft edge of salt, or another light material, and wraps it around the bone, and ties it to the broken part, so that it does not move; and returns the tie around the back, and draws it tight, and rewards each hour the lure, and if it relaxes, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the wound, or pain or apoplexy, if you hurry, and it relaxes, and removes the stitch, and addresses what came from the ways of treatments; then re-tie the stitch, and draws it as much as it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaching of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It is said that the breaching of the ribs does not happen until after the back, and at the head of the dens, and they do not occur because they are curly; and it is well felt in the inquest that it must be so.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is if you place the breaching evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then place the plaster, and tighten with a needle, if you have the skill.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaching of the ribs is inclined at the dens, it feels very great pain and pressure, like tears; and it is pointed, and then vomits great amounts of blood, and it is for the good of health, and the ancients have put much effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if it is said that it can be administered meat that inflames the belly, by pinching the nipple with the girdle.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, that challenging does not come, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, if it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And none of them would put ventsouces on the shoulder, by sucking them, and it seems reasonable; however, doubt is that the ventouce does not attract the superfluities to the shoulder by its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And none of them would cover the shoulder with oily powdered lint, and then put tents between the ribs to measure the liver's turn, then treat the pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone that points through the tissue, and doubt arises in the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the shoulder of the breast, and to put in an instrument to hold the face; and therefore it is necessary to set the bone, and to drain it slightly, and then to sew the edges of the wound, if they are large, and to cure the sutures, as long as it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if abscesses come, then put on oiled linen cloths, and cover the wound; and treat while the wound is coming, and make sure to clean the surrounding area as much as possible, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	Of the fracture of the collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never has a fracture of the collarbone come about, and rarely does it happen; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	When there is no pain, and you see whether it will be healthy or not, if you see your hands soft and swollen and lifeless, and cannot move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel any pain.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Dangerous are those that are mortally dislocated, and if they do not move and feel well when extracted and not stretched, dangerous are those who say the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if we put them in treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if you see your bones are soft, and your accidents are those that are in the hands, and if your back jumps and there is ventilation and sensation of will; and when it is swallowed, if there is ventilation and sensation of will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	When he is lying on his back and sees a shadow, if he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Those who are mortally ill: if they do not labor in their care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come, if it is something lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if the treatment is that he has an abscess, if it is put with an oil rose or oil of myrrh, as long as it is calmed; then put on a comfortable plaster and bandages, and tie it with a string, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep much on that part where he feels the pain, as long as he is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When certain bones split, if they are realigned; and then set the bone, then assemble the two sides of the wound as much as possible in a straight line, and then care for the injury by applying ointment, as much as necessary; and if the limbs of the bone are broken, which are called the "broken limbs" of the knee, then take your left hand's purse from your right hand, and place it in the other hand on your cheek, then put the splint and the tape on, as you can; then tighten, and if it has split again, then cut it off, and set the bone, and care for the wound as much as possible until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Recently, if the thigh bone is broken, and if it is, then there is no need for a lot of amusement at the head; and it becomes long, and slopes downwards, and pain comes to the knee, and swelling, and inflammation occurs in the affected area.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand as far as possible while being on the fracture; and examine which bone is broken and how it is broken, and if the fracture is only at the head, then place it in its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it declines to the bone, then I order the patient to lie on his stomach as long as the restoration of this fracture is not clear.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it evenly, if you place an aspirating plaster on it, then place a piece of flannel or a keur on it, and tighten the fracture as much as possible so that it does not move; and apply the leu to the costes as long as the ligature is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess ruptures and comes out, if it is not opened, as long as the abscess ruptures is calmed, and place what we have mentioned before; then return to the treatment, and tighten it as much as possible if there are no other accidents; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is the bone that is between the upper arm and the shoulder blade of the arm, and when it is broken, it must be repaired according to one of two methods:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And if the head of the shoulder is dislocated, it must be reduced by pulling the bones up and holding the patient's arm, then the broken end of the bone is pushed back into the socket as far as it will go, and a socket is formed with a small piece of bone; then the surgeon should gently stretch the bandage with both hands, until the bandage returns to its original shape, and the patient can bear weight on the arm.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is if one holds the patient down while they are in pain, and lays their hand on their collarbone, then commands the ministers to touch the parts where the bracelet is on their hands, and touches the others lightly all over the limb, and spreads each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then force the limb to move against the bracelet, and move the bracelet, and stretch each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the bracelet is near the shoulder of the arm, then it is necessary to make the ministers wet with water, and the other towards the elbow; and if the bracelet is towards the elbow, then it is necessary to make the ministers lightly touch, without causing pain, as long as the bracelet is even with the shoulder and the elbow; then tighten the bracelet, as you can, and hold steady, without moving.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	1. If the wound is infected, and it does not improve after seven days, and it is treated with ointment and rose oil, as long as the wound is infected; then it is drained, and the manner of draining is to place the plaster on the blister, then assemble the arm on the helper, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and then tighten the bandage, and drain from both sides of the helper and the arm, so that the arm is in its place, nothing else will dislodge it, or if the bone does not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	When you doubt that the bone does not move, use these and put the incision on a wider and stronger nail than the others, and have one between each incision, and make each one as large as it passes through the break three times of each part; then tighten the nails, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more firmly and less by moving them away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	If you see the seat of the nails and the stringing, as we have said, in the part where you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess, if you let it remain for a month, as we have said; then look at each third day's link, that pruritus does not grow or come to the shoulder because the fleas do not come to the member due to it being too rough.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident occurs, but only if it happens three months or more later, and the patient sleeps with their face on their stomach and their hands on their stomach; and then place the helper I cussin plain of linen evenly, and watch every hour of the day or night, where the broken limb does not move, or is not softened by the ligaments; if the address through the power of medicine, and the meat that we have before us, in such a way that the meat is subtle; and when it comes to be taken back, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the helper and the leg should be re-taken in 40 days or so; therefore, one must ease and administer baths and medicines for the patient to recover.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the structure is stiff and thick, it should be eased and delayed for 40 days or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm.
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "femur" and one is smaller, and that one is the pocket; and the other is larger, and that one is the opposite side of the small one; by chance, only the large femur or the small one is broken, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the teeth are broken, the restorations are light, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, it is the healing that is poor, and more painful than when they are broken individually.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small teeth that are broken, then it will be sufficient to extend lightly and put even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large teeth that are broken, then they must be drawn more tightly; and extend along the gums, and raise the thumb of the hand higher than the others, and the teeth should be lowered below their own level, and the gums in front of them higher than the labor they suffer; then extend the bones of the arm to the opposite part of the shoulder, or to the other side, and some other bones to the other side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he places the bone in its place, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is in pieces, then he puts each piece in its place, and if there are no loose ends that point to the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then as we have said before, set the bone and the fracture.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if it is with the fracture of a wound, I have spoken to the single physician; if he takes care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of restoration, apostemes chaus arise, if the thread made of oil of rose and wax is not too hard or too soft, and it is gently draped until the apostemes chaus are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then the cervical, and he puts the plaster with a lot of powder from the mill, because he puts the pins, and it is the pin of the bracelet that is larger than the others; and you measure that it must have six pins or arms in more positions: either that the bracelet is in one of the bones, either in two; and it is drawn more under the bracelet than other parts, and less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and the threads that are under the bracelet wet and moist, and not too hard or rough; and the string, which is drawn out, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the limb after some years.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, if you wash the member with hot water until the itching is calmed, and let the member rest for a while.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the stretching, and if the limbs are softened and the bones are exposed, and it seems like something, if it is removed.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the knots do not come to the member because it is too tight, because of which it is necessary that you loosen it immediately, and let it rest for a while until the knots are untied, and then stretch it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things happen to the patient within twenty years, it is not our fault.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If the shoulder is dislocated, and the hands can be placed on the patient's chest, and the collarbones are even, and there is little movement and deformation, and the patient falls asleep on their back; and if this dislocation is restored in thirty or forty years, or in twenty years by chance, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Be cautious that on the back of the hand, and in the wrist, there are few dislocations, and only slight pain comes from it, many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	When the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, and if the patient can hold it steady, and holds it firmly in front of him; then he places his hand on the extended toe, and extends the muscles of the broken bones, and places them evenly in the joints, as far as they are well joined; and applies plaster and bandages, if necessary, then he puts a splint according to the size of the foot; and it is wrapped in a fold of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the heel of the foot, near the sole of the plantar bone, I make a dressing of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind the broken bone; and then stretch it with a long bandage, and it is tied, as it should be, if it can be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is at the hip, then if you can place a splint on it, and another in the foot, if the hand is straight and erect, then the leg will be completely fixed between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture does not occur in either of us, if it is bent, then if you fix it straight, if you can; and with the foot, and if you see that you put a splint on the ankle, and if you lift the fracture with it, and if it does not move; and if the fracture occurs in others, if it is in the index or one of the others, if it is bent, and the other is fixed, and the hand is straight, which is good, or you put on a splint, as much as possible, or you put on an ankle brace, if you can; and be careful in the restoration and the position of the abscess, and see what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken joint
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the joint is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward; the restoration is done by reattaching the ligaments that were torn, and the other part is left alone.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient feels pain in their face, then they extend each muscle of their limb evenly; and it is when the break occurs in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the joint, then one or more of the ligaments will be torn in the direction of the point, and the others will be left alone.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And as it approaches the joint, and therefore the ligaments of the joint are relaxed, and the extension is lost; then place the bone evenly in your two hands, according to its natural figure, and then apply the splint, and the bandage, and do not let it move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it has become inflamed, if you let it rest, then return to your work and your care; the bandage is made in part manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap it around the brace I bend doubled in II or III, and remove any excess, then twist the leg as far as the heel reaches the root of the nail, and place one end of the string between the thigh and the leg, loosening the joint of the knee; then twist the leg and the thigh with the bend, and put on the brace, and put an eyelet in the leg bone; then place the leather between the leg and the thigh to make it even, and then start tying three or four turns around the brace; and as you add more turns of the brace, the string becomes less tight; then take out the two ends of the string that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and at the third eyelet that is on the brace, until you see the petticoat; the string, if it does not move from its place, then leave it as is, and if it does not swell or change appearance in any other way.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it happens, if it moves, and addresses what comes, as we have said many times; and if it has pieces of bone that prick, if it can be, then it can; and if not, then it can cut the bone and draw out; and the cure, as we have said, depending on how healthy it is.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never has the cheek been broken once, when I put it in its place, as we do with the arm and shoulder; however, in the restoration that is made, it does not click on the patient's pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And advises that the cheek is restored in L years, or less than less, according to the different complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the right knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the right knee joint there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, whether it is only a sprain or a puncture, and it comes to all wounds and hurts, and it feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is if you put back what has been dislocated as much as possible, until it is assembled and can be; then put the splint, and if you have a round staple, insert it, and draw it tightly, as you should, then reward all the positions we have said for other dislocations, such as apoplexy and other appearances; if you put back whatever is necessary for each accident, as much as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is sometimes called "right" but not "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and it breaks all equally as the arm does, and for this reason the restoration is done in the same way as the right arm, and the joints are all turned. And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bones are broken, then turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bones are broken, then feel for great pain and see that it is well; then turn slowly.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	1. Then, apply extension and place it evenly; but remember, if the break is ugly, and there are more pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Once you have completed your work, if you have long hair that pricks the leg on both sides and is as long as the leg from the groin to the ankle, and then wrap it around the leg from the knee to the ankle, and tie it tightly, and make sure the leg does not deviate to the right or left, and it is well; and no one has caused pain in the leg, and it was from the hair, and he puts it on the leg to prevent movement, and it is properly made at the fracture or wound; and shake each leg every day to see if there is any swelling or other accident; if the cure is as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of the bones of the shoulder
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no break, but the bones of the shoulder never break and must be very strong, and they only crack in more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the shoulder break and you see them pushing against each other, if they are so thin that they touch the ground, just like when you are flying, then now put your hand on the cheek, lift the bone as much as it can in its place, then press it until it feels firm in its place; then put the splint and staples, and make a small pillow under the shoulder blade, then draw it towards the shoulder, then wrap the bandage around, and other things that you know.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the bone is not healed, for you will find that the bones are broken and dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are two broken bones, if they are repaired, as we have said, then place a steel on one of the breaks according to its length; and make the other end larger, then place a pulley on that uneven joint that I mentioned, and tighten it evenly; and if there are II or III, or more, broken bones, then place one steel on each according to its quantity, wound around in one direction of lin, and tighten the pulley away from the joint of the pectoral muscle so that it sticks well. And if it is hanging down from the chest of the pectoral muscle, then it will stick well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	It is necessary that you do not ignore the other things I have said about other injuries, as soon as we have said them; and treat each accident as we have advised.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the small finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the woman's bone is broken, if it is set in place, then it leans towards the side of the small finger, and is held by the thigh; then fill the nature of the wound with cloth, and put it as high as possible; then bring the woman to bed, and gently bend the hip a little at a time, and as soon as the nature comes into the wound, return the bone with the cloth; and when she sees blood, if the cloth is soaked, and when she has stopped bleeding, put it back on, and leave it in seven days or more: if the fracture is restored, and you see it, take a bucket of water, and tie a cord to the nipple, and blow all the water into the nature; then suck out of the cord forms, as long as the water is filled with cloth: the nature will return to the fracture; then fill it with cloth, and leave it without any more days, as long as it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of the elbow is broken, or of the woman, if it is repaired as we have said in the elbow of the horse; and these fractures are not hidden from him who sets the bone and dresses it, and reads my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break signifies in more ways than one the right direction of the restoration: understand the directions.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the angle, when it is broken, take an ostrich's beak and bite the angle; then wrap it around, and leave three turns or in the opposite direction, and it will be cured quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of a fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, whether it is the bone of the shoulder or the helper, or seeming, that they are now healthy, if those wounds that we have said testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the healthy wound is that it re-bleeds, if you have nothing else, then continue to restore the fracture in the same hour, or the next day, if the patient does not die.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the patient does not die, then leave the restoration for the next day, as long as the patient is calm and does not touch it again on the third or fourth day, because you will cause other accidents to happen.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the bone is broken, it is located at the point discovered, so you should place it lightly in your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	If the extension is not easy to make with your hands, if the ramus has this instrument which is of iron, which is seven or eight fingers long, and the angle is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary to make three or four, according to how much work there is in each case of fracture; and it should be thin and a little large, so that it does not slip with the compression on the member of your hand, and should also be ahead, and large at the front end.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	The first line of the text is translated as: "And it is called 'palinchage', because it is intended that the shoulders be placed on the top of the bone of the shoulder; and the bandage once, as much as it rises, and is equal to the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	The second line of the text is translated as: "And if the fracture is subtle, and the bandages cannot well hold the bone, then it is necessary to cover the top of the bone with the bandage, as long as the bandages have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	The third line of the text is translated as: "And if you do not bring the bone back, as we have said, if the top covers an instrument that is suitable for your power, or sharp or stronger, then relieve this which is causing pain in the bone with roughness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is re-set, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, seek medical attention immediately, as there may be a problem with their natural joint.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you continue until it is in its place, then dress the wound with a piece of black, lint-like material, and make sure it is clean and not oily, as it can cause irritation and infection; then administer medications as needed after setting the bone, and leave the wound open, covering it completely according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound does not become tight with the fracture; many have had this problem, and have caused the patient's death or corrosion, and have always caused more strain and more sores on other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	When the wound is large or severe, and you doubt that it will heal, if we have said so, and you feel pain in the leg, but cannot manage to put on bandages; then wrap the leg with cloth, cut off the loose parts, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after the first or second day that the wound has healed completely, and if you have used antiseptic cream on it, and you have applied a salve to relieve pain, which is a safe and effective remedy, then proceed with the following steps.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary to stretch the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is sore and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	It is necessary that the member be aligned in some way so that the bow can be applied lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If they persist, and it cannot be held steady but moves away from the bow, you must try to reduce the fracture with a splint, and all those pieces that cause pain must be covered with the bandage.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	If an abscess comes to the knee, or any other form of infection, if you are able to treat it, according to what is said in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	If the bone is broken and exposed through the skin, as if it were the bone of the elbow or shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if it is not treated immediately, because many times death comes after 20 years or 30, then the wound is left to heal on its own; and if it does not heal, then treat the wound.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The first sentence to translate is "des brus qui viennent sortre la sodure". The translation is
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come many times after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and it is a shame to see the limb in such a position; and by chance, it cannot make the limb its natural size.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	When the wound is clean and healed: if the patient is given laxative medicines, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and senna leaves, and similar others, if you do not take any of these things or all together, and mix them with warm ointment or with a large amount of urine or with honey; and apply them to the wound, and tightly bind it, and do not let it slip from your hands; and then loosen it, and repeat another one as long as the swelling remains; or you draw out a well-made piece; because the property of this piece is that it will convert all the flaps on the limbs into hardness, and it becomes like a bolt when the wound is already converted into flesh, and it becomes firm to the touch; or you leave it with no one, as long as it is healed, and the cure as long as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The first sentence to translate is "dou membre qui est foibles après la garison". The translation is: "the
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and becomes weaker after the weak members and subtleties, if it comes from causes: either because one was too tightly bound, and could not become loose enough; or because it had too many knots, and could not come out at the member; or because of many inflammations; or because of too great movements, not in its time; or because it has little blood in its heart, and is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is if you make the patient drink wine, and make the heart tense as much as possible without multiplying in it; then give him baths, and let him rest and sleep; then put poultice on the member, if it attracts great inflammation, and often the fever is acute, until the inflammation reaches the member; and then return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The dislocated limb after the injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is swollen after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the dislocated form of the limb is deformed, it does not belong to its natural nature: if one does not believe the fools who say that the whole bone must be broken at once, and all others have done this in our land; and these fractures are blamed, and great harm comes from them, and by chance the death occurs; however, if the wounds and torments are fresh, and if they are washed with hot water or herbs that soften, as if with warm viscam, and roots, and honey, and similar things; and I apply a mollifying ointment, as if it were well made, and I take the muscle of viscam, and cook it with fat of linseed or oil of saffron, and apply it thus; or I take fat figs, and crush them with fish of collarel, and similar medicines that dry the sweat.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is there a stop to the node when it is continued and long with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be no movement in the limb at all hours.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is awakened and hardened, as with a wound, and there is need for the bone to be fused, then it comes to cope with the covering of the bone, in the incision subtle and lightly; and put on bandages and study in the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it comes now to bring sensation to the arm.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if we delay, and it becomes inflamed, and by chance we reset it on the shoulder; because it does not move to the ear when it is inflamed: many times brought pain and other pains; always, when this happens, I make the patient healthier, then let him, as long as the abscess is not healed; then warm and oily ointment is applied to the limb, then it is gently reset, and each member is cured as it was cured in its shoulder.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the chapters of shoulder dislocations by the pieces of bone.
des mandibules	by the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There are two ways for the mandibles to be dislocated: either a small piece of bone is missing from one or both of the jaws, and it is softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging downwards, and causing saliva to drip from the mouth, which cannot be held or closed, and wrapping around the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	If the dislocation is small, it can return to its original position through various adjustments.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	1. And if it is complete and accomplished, then you should reset it as soon as possible without force; in such a way that the physician marks the shoulder of the patient, and cuts the roots of the dislocation of the lower jawbone at the corner of the mouth, where the dislocation is located; and the other two hands are deformed to make them equal; and instruct the patient to smooth and move their jaws and all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	2. And the teeth are placed evenly, as they should be in his mouth.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	3. And if the jaw is reset, then it should be done gently, just like the lower jaws when the teeth are aligned, using warm and oily ointments as much as possible; do not force it to be reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	When they are properly returned to their place and the patient's mouth feels well tightened, if you put soft flannels moistened with oil of rosemary and wax on it, then gently tie the legs; let the patient sleep on his back, and his head between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor strain himself to breathe, but lightly chew on meat as long as the pain is steady and does not affect the jaws; then take what you see lightly, and do not force your mouth open with the tongue and lips, as long as the jaw is well fixed and sound.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reinserted at once in an hour, and are not converted to their original shape, then if fevers and customary colds come on, and by chance the abdomen becomes distended, and by chance vomiting of pure bile occurs.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, you will know that it is a loss; and many have died in the past nine years.
de la forcelle	of force.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot be dislodged from the cost, due to the continuation of the effort and the pain, and it is never loosened at the end, and it is felt to be so.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	1. If the dislocation is that the shoulder has come out of its place and is extended, then press the head of the shoulder against your palm, and it will return; then put the splint and bandage on, and extract it; and the shoulder that is towards the elbow cannot be reduced; if not, and if it cannot be reduced at all, then reset it at the shoulder, as we have said; then put the splint and bandage on, and extract it, and command the patient to rest until they are healthy; and then again, bring the head of the dislocation back to its place on the elbow.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways in which the shoulder is dislocated: either it is dislocated at the head of the humerus; or at the shoulder; or at the elbow, and this happens rarely; or it does not dislocate at all from the shoulder, but rather from the nerves; and more often it dislocates towards the humerus, especially in those who have little strength, because they fall very far; in those who have enough strength, they fall a short distance and return a short distance.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they strike or crush their shoulder, and stretch out the shoulder with an abscess, and take care to have it dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you examine it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	Then examine the dislocations as they move towards the axilla, and make a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one; you will find a gap between them, and at the head of the shoulder, you will find the axilla at the top of the shoulder, just like some holes; and it cannot bring its hand to its eye, nor move with any movements; and if it is dislocated high, if it is not hidden, because you can see it clearly at the axilla; and this way of dislocation is not easy to return, when it is new, or when the patient is a child.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister gently places the hand on the shoulder of the patient, then spreads your fingers wide, and gently moves the joint upwards towards the elbow; the minister gently places the hand, extends it upwards, and places it beside the shoulder; if it happens quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not happen as we have said in our hands just after, then it is necessary that the patient be dipped in warm water; the hand is gently warmed and soothed, like a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in warm water, and is applied; then the patient's shoulder is soaked, and a piece of linen is placed on the back, not too wet nor too dry, then the heel of the foot is placed on the stool, and the main vein is gently stroked, and the hand of the patient is drawn up; other ministers will touch the patient's shoulder to prevent it from moving; this shoulder now returns, and if you see that it follows in this manner: then the present home which is larger than the shoulder is dressed; it is turned towards the cost, and the arm is placed below the shoulder, and the shoulder is lifted, so that the shoulder hangs downwards; other ministers then draw the hand upwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the patient is too light, and there is nothing heavy with it, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the reduction is also done another way: and it is like this: and it is like the long rib in the earth, whose head is also returned as if it were a pistil, and not too big or too rough; then it is put back into the shoulder, but if it has twisted too much, and the shoulder is stretched out, then the hand is formed on the other side, and the joint returns to its place immediately; and if it does not return in all these things that we have said, then this cure is made: take two thick braces of the left arm and four thin ones, which have the chief entered from the front of the forearm, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie the head of the shoulder that was not bleeding, then place it in the palm of the hand; extend some arms over the long shoulder, and the helper over the shoulder of the arm, then place the arm at the elbow of an awl of large size, and extend the hands on the other side, and leave the chest hanging from another part: the joint was now relieved.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever way that may be, if you happen to put the palm of your hand a linen thread as even as possible, then place a sprinkle of flour on the mill with incense and wool all over the shoulder and around, then tighten the thread on the palm again, and turn the lace on the sprinkle, and wrap your hand around the arm at its collar, and let the hands remain still.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	The patient should drink little by little, as the limb is comfortable, because it heals faster; then drink more after the first seven days or weeks, and move it; and if it is tight and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	If the joint is swollen due to moisture or another reason, and it has not subsided after three days, then it is necessary to apply a cauterization at the third position, as shown in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you follow all these steps, and after seven weeks, the joint still does not hold and cannot lift the arm forward, it means that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is compressed or extended or softened; and it means that the joint will never return to its original position.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the toe, and the ankles, or the heel, if it is made by force, and stretching of hands, and it is treated at another time; and it is cured when it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes pain in the limb, and later in movement, if the patient uses cold water many times, as long as that pain is not relieved, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dear dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is said that the costly joint is dislocated at many points, and those points return; and it is dislocated from all parts, even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not well set because it is seen and felt well; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the male member with the female, if you see it open wide.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is weak, and cannot grip the arm, nor touch the shoulder with anything.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it always with the thumb and index finger, because if you do not reset it, it would be painful to return; and by chance, it cannot be reset at all, even when it is in the groin; rather than other dislocations, and it causes more pain, and by chance, it comes to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the resetting is necessary when it is, if it can be returned, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and the arms are expanded, and the hands are pulled according to the chest, from the outside and inside, and tie the joint with your fingers together, or at the root of the palm, as it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and proud of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to the shoulder, then apply strong extension; and if two people extend the arm, and hold it with two people, so that it does not move at extension, then turn the arm in each part, then wrap a double long and wide cloth around it; and when the patient feels the joint at the shoulder, if there is no oil to lubricate the joint, then bend the joint as much as it can; and when it returns to the shoulder, put a dry cloth with a piece of beef dripping on it, and form the arm at the bottom of the injured limb, and leave some fingers, then let go.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	When the joint is firmly fixed in its place, if it does not move, and it is left; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then repeat the application and the joint, and leave for a while until it is firmly fixed; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If the patient feels pain after the reduction of the joint, and it becomes quiet, if it is bathed and gently rubbed, and pressed until it is calmed; or you put on the joint a fat sheep's wool dressing, then leave it for one night and the bone, and let the bone enter or bath; and when it is awake, gently rub the joint, then remove the wool dressing, and then enter or bath; and repeat two or three times until it is healthy; and if you see, if you put on fat sheep's wool moistened with butter, and press it; if it returns to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand.
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is lighter than other joints. It is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, while it is dislocated, unless the arm is shortened or there is an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you place the hand on a table and extend the fingers, measure the distance between them, and put your thumb at the appearance of the joint, and hold it as it returns to its place. If you see that it is well in its place, then you can place the thumb on the back of your hand on a table for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then he should place his hand on top of his arm on the table, and he should see if his hand fits into this appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it does not return now, then it is well if it does not, since the relief of the plaster does not cause pain. Let him continue to try again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you do not put the hand in the arm after any time, since the dislocation is painful; and if the hands are not softened, and nothing can be stretched at all: then you should know that the nerves are wounded, or the artery; if there is no other engine than to strain with fire cautery, and by chance it does not work any other way.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hands are at the elbow, if they are placed on the probe that we have mentioned, then it is tightened and left for a while, then it is loosened and left alone.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot be moved well, and there is no swelling, if the hot poultice of wool is applied, and the area is friced as much as possible when it is dry.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never have been dislocated the two hands in any part, never at the back of the palm or stomach; therefore they are loose, and the dislocation is adjusted to your hands as it returns, then hold the shoulder of the loose hand, and lead it to the part where it was dislocated; and leave it for a while, and then put it in place, and as for the other hand, if it is tightened, and you move it, and tie it again, and do this often, as soon as it becomes loose, and so do it whenever it is dislocated at the stomach of the hand, and do it just as you have done before, when it is swollen; and do this whenever it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	The dislocation of the shoulder joint is due to moisture, and it cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder joint is dislocated, or if there are more dislocations, if there is no treatment, it can cause death to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the patient jumps and cannot hold it, and many times the body parts become soft, or the elbow or shoulder or arm, or if the shoulder is repeatedly dislocated in four parts; this is called "gibbosity": the treatment is that you reward yourself if the gibbosity has come from childhood: if there is no treatment or cure, then total.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	1. And that which comes from the cautery or percussion or similar things, they call the old ways of cures by long words, but they do not bring much good; but I have abbreviated according to my intention and formed trimmings in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	1. I say that in the gallbladder that comes before, there is no health or sickness; and also those that come directly in the second costal arch, and can be cured only by the one that comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient is extended on his side in the first lobe, and has no strain on him, so he does not cry; then form a tison at the chest in the earth, and the other as piez, and tie one through the mouth of the patient, and the other as hainches, and as chevilles; and two ministers close the liiens, one at the chief and the others as piez, among the II tisons; and they should be well closed, the tison as we have said, and the mires put his hands on the spine formed, until it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it does not return through this treatment, then take a tourniquet of three fingers on the long arm, cut off the nail, and the patient should be on the side, and cut the handle of the tourniquet off at the nail, then put the wick of the tourniquet on the spike; and put the thumbs on the other handle of the tourniquet, and press well until it returns to the arm; and if you see, then do the same for the turnbuckle that turns the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if you have two nails in the patient's shoulder of one arm, and pass two others between each nail, and have a thumb's width of long spikes on either side, and have one thumb's pertus in each nail, or the turnbuckle turns, and they are firmly held in the ground so that they do not move; and between each nail have one turning nail, and the other turning nails with a thumb's width of long spikes on either side to turn the turnbuckle; and then the ligament that is between the anchors at the shoulder and the handle of the turnbuckle, and the other ligament from the handles to the other turnbuckle, and all the masters turn their turnbuckles equal to what we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When the joint is equalized, if it is moistened with a drying powder with a great amount of urine, and then washed, and then the tablet of III doses of the third part of the gallbladder and the healthy part of the spine, tied with a string as we have said, and used with subtle narcotics until it is relieved; and nothing comes out in the end of the salve, if it is necessary to administer soothing and desensitizing medications with the tablet we have mentioned before; and never once does one give a piece of plaster, and never once does one come the appearance at the back of the spine of the person with the hunched back, and make sure that this is not dislocation; and it is the bone that is open, because one does not have to have much confidence: by chance it might come death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The shoulder joints and the shoulder blade joints are only dislocations, not like other joints; and the shoulder joint is divided into four parts: superior and inferior, front and back; and more superior ones, and less on the front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of a dislocation is that when the injured leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and more open, and the injured knee cannot double its joint at fire; and this is the one that is deformed due to abscess compression, because the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who comes to the forge, if this accident is contrary to these fronts.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who came to the front, if they are well in his leg according to the completion; however, do not double the gentle sensations with pain, and if you see it moving, if it cannot before, and retains its urine, and enflames the anus, and when he goes, if it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who came to the rear, if he cannot expand his gentle, and double, and that leg is more tense than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the shoulder is raised against the costal bones.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The first line of the text translates to: "If the dislocation reappears due to this appearance, and it does not improve according to its position, and there is no treatment; then it only has presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	The second line of the text translates to: "And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry and return the joint, it will be tense and deformed, and the limb will be bent to the left and right; by chance, if it returns, and there is no other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	The third line of the text translates to: "And if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you apply strong pressure with your hand on the leg for two hands, or on the limb that is closest to your genital area; and other measures include extending your hand over the limb in a similar way that you stretch out your hands away from your belly, then you straighten the limb at the ankle; and some others hold the head of the joint with their hand; and extend both arms once, as long as the patient is lifted off the ground once, and remains still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four appearances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not work, it is necessary to treat the appearance If the dislocation occurs in the jaw, it is necessary to seize the patient's shoulder on its healthy side, then tighten the ligament on the root of the thumb, and the other limb that is lax, then tighten the ligament towards the angle and against the force; then apply other members to the malformed arm, embrace the largest bone of the malformed thumb, and extend it to the deformed form: if it returns to its original position now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	1. And if you do not press it in this manner as we have said, then you must lie on your side with the maiden's two feet together, and her two knees, and so the maiden's leg is extended twice as much as the others; then hang it from the head of a post, and place the hands on the ground for support; then command the minister to embrace the head of the chisel, and other ministers hanging with the maiden, who embrace form the chisel, because the joint returns now firmly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	2. And when the dislocation is at its worst, if the maiden grows pale as we have said in the one who has the trembling, and draws the joint on the maiden's leg properly and the other as well; then place the stitches, the head and the other as the thighs, and then fix the stitch between the maiden's thighs in her form; and have moist cloths laid down around her so she does not break the maiden, then extend each minister towards her, and hold the dislocation in your hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it there, and press as we have said in the gilt-side, and guide the member on the safe side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, if it comes to extend the painful limb as we have said; and put the patient's hand on their painful joint, then press with the other hand, and pull back towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, and it cannot be extended, do not raise the limb from the ground, but it must be as it was when it was misaligned at the back, as we have said in the bed; and put it on your face, and extend it as we have said before, and press on the joint with the table; and it will be when the limb is extended, and they will be equal; then adjust the fingers, and place the plaster, and the bandage with a bend, if the limb does not move; and lie down for three or four hours, then remove the plaster, and see if they are equal, if the bandage, as we have said before, and leave it alone until the members are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it should not be pulled downwards or to the side, but rather behind.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	If you order the patient to bend their leg at the knee and hold it there, and if the dislocation is evident, then the reduction of all three joints is as follows: straighten the leg as much as possible, and then place your back on the patient's foot and place your hand on their thigh; then grasp the two bones of the shoulder that are dislocated, and gently stretch them until the shoulder returns to its socket, and the signs are that the knee is firmly held at the hip; apply a bandage, and make the knee bend at the hip, and the flesh comes together for three or four turns, then remove the bandage; and do not force the patient's leg back, until the member is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	If the limb is not present, and extension is administered with great force, as we have said in the treatment of sprains, until it is healthy again.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the big toe
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The big toe is never used, and it is never completely dislocated, and it is bent and twisted.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and before reaching the part where it is dislocated: the hands should be light, and it should be gently extended when it is only tense.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, and before reaching the part where it is swollen: the hands should be light, and it should be gently extended when it is only tense. Then sit the patient on their right side, and pull the leg with your hand; then take the foot in your left hand, and twice lift it up, and hold it at the top; and do this twice, as we have said, by bending and lifting the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, if it does not return, continue the treatment, as it will return; and if it cannot return again, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and hold the knee firmly on the ground between the thighs, and bend the leg; then mark the other assistants with the knee, and extend the foot to their hands or to the patient's elbow; then extend all the assistants equally, and the patient should be between the knees of the ankle to hold the ankle; then place the dislocation in your hands, and have the other assistants mark the healthy leg at the back, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When the dislocation occurs, if it is treated with plaster and bandages, and the limb is formed, and the patient lies down on the leg, and covers the nerves that are at the ankle joint, so that the ligaments do not become too tight; then it is left to stay for two to three days, and if the ligaments tighten, then it is loosened; then it is removed at the end of the third or fourth day, and the patient is allowed to walk on it with the aid of crutches for four days; and if the dislocation does not improve, it is a sign that the treatment has not been successful.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound becomes inflamed and comes, if it is necessary to calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
des dois	Of two things, one is that the
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	If both are dislocated, and they are able to be extended gently in the work, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no way painful to the shoulder or joint, and it comes that you must hold the patient on their side or on their stomach, then place your foot on the part where the joints open, then press with your foot on this part until it returns; and when it is straight, if it does not open, then place a table under the head of the shoulder at the shoulder blade, then form the foot, and leave it there, then remove it; and let them rest, as long as they are healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When wound and dislocation occur together, and it is seen that the wound is being restored, many times the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in your treatment, whether you are skilled in the art and have used it for a long time, and whether you are pitiful and merciful and slow, do not be presumptuous; and begin with soothing remedies for abscesses, and let the patient hold onto the hand of God; and when you see hope for health, reset the member to its place immediately, even if the abscess is painful and vigorous; and when the member is at its place, apply soothing remedies for abscesses, and cure the wound, as it is necessary, with desiccants; and if there is a break with dislocation, and the bones are small, then the bones, and do as I have said in simple diseases; and do not enter into the path of despair, according to what I have said, because this is according to your creator, and for the wisdom of your arm and heart.
Amen	1. For the fire c
