O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, three sons, I have fulfilled this book that is behind the science of medicine the fulfillment of it, and have ended for its exposures and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to my vision that I have completed this with the method, which is from the work of hands, it is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is despised in every way, if it is perished by the science and practice, and there is nothing left of the works but the small descriptions in books that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And this is how the error and vanity have come about, and the intentions are closed and science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I seem to think that I will revive this ordination of this cauterization according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the instruments of cauterization and other instruments of the work with the alignment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is their craft.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled hands masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who enters this field to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of parts, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, bones, and teeth, and the number of joints, and the brain and the movable and resting joints, and also the issue of the same.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Iophras says that the non with the non is not enough, and with the will is little; and at the same time in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we say that who are not acquainted with things said, if they try it, they may err and harm men; and I have often seen these who enter into this science and abandon the science and sense of experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I see a madman who cuts off my apostile from scrophules or the col of a woman, and cuts the arteries of the col; because so much blood issues outside that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And see if another mirror that treats a piercing of a man's ear, and the piercing was large; if it is removed with the piece of the bladder, and he died in the third year.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I had already been called to treat, and see the position of the surgeon and the size of the piercing, and if it was well cut, it died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see if another mirror that treated the leg of our king who had a broken bone, and with the fracture it was plated; and the surgeon's ignorance forced the fracture on the plate as it was done in a short time, and did not leave any pain in the plate, and left it finally; and he commanded that it should not be dislodged; and later that the leg became completely swollen and the bone and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am summoned to come to him, and I hurried to come and cut off the leg; and when I saw it dislocated if it was in pain and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all paths of the corruption were already confirmed by the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the member as long as the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another mirror that will fall and be enchanted, and then burned through the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For gangrene, when it is free of melancholic humor, only one thing is needed if it is not in its entirety the leg that can be healed completely what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	1. Therefore, thrice-worn threads, you should be glad to know that the work of hands is divided into two sections: this is knowledge, whether it is safe in other arrangements; and I will show you in each chapter of this book where there is danger and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	2. Therefore, take care of your threads so that they may not be harmed by others' words; if you take up your weapons in anger, and use your remedies lightly but firmly, and choose the better way for the grace of God, so that you may come to salvation and be healthy; and leave the unwholesome diseases of grief behind; and keep your weapons ready in case you have to come from this world to another for glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen's disciples often ignored his advice: "Do not take half-measures in the treatment of disease, lest you be called a foolish man.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have seen this treatise in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and medicinal cauterization, and it is arranged in order from the head down to the feet; as well as the forms of strangulation, and the making of cauterizing irons, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is arranged in order and the forms of strangulation.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered by the chief surgeons, and the forms of the splints.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	However, if we remember our work, it is necessary to mention the quality of the help and not each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the help, and not each complexion, is the longest word and the most subtle science and the secret remedy; and for this they speak of more cases, and agree to this; and they are few in their words because I doubt the longevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally with all complexions or matters, for which complexions: it is to know hot complexions with matter, and dry complexions with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, none will devise or say that cauterization is great help; and the other will say the opposite: that cauterization is only good for disease that comes from choler and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured for hot disease by choler, nor by dryness; and that is what he who says the opposite says, that cauterization helps great with hot disease that comes from the hearts of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you perceive the chest of the patient and its moisture at the complexion of hot fire, you should immediately close the wound.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it at any time by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all ways, it does not interfere more than he who has experienced it, and knows by long use of the cauterization chapter, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their symptoms and their spaciousness; others complexions have no fear for us, but rather in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And then they resemble and agree with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Understand, children, that cauterization is similar to fire if it contains the secrets of remedies, and more beneficial than cauterization with hot medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and only comes to harm when it reaches the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Hot remedies come from one part of the body to another by allaying, and bring about the cure of the member in need; and sometimes the patient Li feus por his high quality and the goodness of his substance does not harm, if he has no superfluity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	1. And I found this in my research through experiment and the length of service and the study I have given to this art, and it is true; and for this I apologize for the length of the language, because I only want to share with you the secret that is fire or water, and the quality of the work, as it affects the diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says by demonstrating; and receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	1. Know, boy, that the cauteries should be made with proper tension and not too tight.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	1. I say that cauterization is useful in all tensions because the pain of the wound is not well managed by the aid of the cauterization; and I also say that if the cauterization is for necessary pains, it should be done with the smallest tension that does not cause great harm to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, chief, that the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and he says thus, but it is not so if one takes care, because cauterization is only a medicine that dries the complexion, and dries the humors that cause pain, and is valued as a medicine to hasten one's valor, and for one's virtue in one's work and signory.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease does not return at all according to the complexion of the patient and the lesion of the disease and its virtue; and they are assembled in him by the acquisition of meat and the superfluities, unless cauterization is administered to him or he has little acquisition and moisture, as for cauterization for pain, and the superfluities, and only part of the pain does not return; but this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	1. And many people do not understand why cauterization is called surgery by others, and this is seen; but they only believe that cauterization is after medicine, but we understand it is false, and cauterization is surgery because when we administer remedies for any disease and they do not work, we then use cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	2. Therefore, it is well that cauterization is called surgery, but not according to the attention of the ignorant.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	3. The ancients said that a gold cauterization instrument was as harmful as one made of iron, and they said this because of the quality of the gold and the highness of its substance; and they said that the gold cautery did not cause any poisoning, but it is true because I have experienced it, and I found that it is true in some men; and the gold cauterization is as good as iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And when you heat the instrument with gold, you do not know if it is hot by its golden color, and it has been too cooled; and if you heat it too much, it melts; and then it has enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that is why we use fire cauteries in our work, as we have mentioned before.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or if you have ordered this chapter of the little joints, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	olive cauteries
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is useful for moisture and cold in the face, and it is done for the disease called "soda", and for many humors that descend from the head, and the ears, and numerous dreams and toothache and throat pain, and even for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, stroke, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: if the physician purges the patient with soluble medicine that modifies the third or fourth vessel, according to which virtues and age and custom of the physician the patient can endure; then repeat the dose of the physician.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then place the root of your palm between the root of his thumb and the second fingers; then if you have two hands, it will bleed, so squeeze the cautery called "olivare," which is formed as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place ink on the bone, and make it descend and tighten your hand repeatedly until you see the bone move slightly; then if you do not see it, continue the cauterization as long as you see the bone as I have told you; then take a piece of cloth, and make it soft and fine cotton, and place it on the bone, and let it lie for three hours; then put it in a warm bath; and leave it until the burn is healed; then apply the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" to the wound as soon as it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if the ancients had said that the more overgrown the wound is, the more it oozes; and this is why it helps.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these say that the fire cautery should be so tight that part of the bone is cut, and then remove what is cut from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that the fire cautery should be so tight that it presses on the bone as far as the width of the vessel that women put in their wounds because the humors escape outside; and it should be tightened for a long time over the wound; after that, it must be treated and sutured.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	1. These two methods of cauterization do not seem to be the best in general, although they may seem effective for some men or those who fear; it seems to me that I should leave them alone, as the heads of the bones are weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we have experienced in other parts; and even when the patient's bones are weak by nature, the first appearance of cauterization seems more salve and milder for me, and therefore I use it in this way.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	2. of ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	3. When all the head is in chronic pain and lasts a long time, if one must use the drugs called "cochies" and pills, as well as purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if it is made with the cauterization we have mentioned before, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making the cauterization at each cornea of the shoulder, as we have described, and then making a cauterization on the bone that is called "vassals"; and these are the ones that are put into a vacuum; and hold your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will explain further; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the corneas be more superficial than those made on the shoulder joint, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to one part of the fire cautery, and it spreads throughout the disease, and the head is purged with medicines modified, and the other treatments I mentioned in the division of diseases are made, and none of this helps: therefore, I made the cauterizations in two ways, that is, with medicinal heat and force.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	If you apply medicinal heat and the wound odes and reopens in two hours, then make a temple with the head in such a way that you can place the dose of aloe back on; and when it is placed, if the lip and the ear are well drawn and left for twelve hours; then remove the dose of aloe and leave the wound for two or three days; then put the cut under pressure as much as possible.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of inflammation as soon as it is healthy; and if you see that there are no such medicines that I have written or treated with other remedies for such medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron burn if it follows this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterization tool as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the form of a ring or has a small opening, and it is placed on the painful part, and hold the member with your hand and gently press the iron on the half that does not have much pain, as long as you do not feel any heat in the artery, which is cold, and causes abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After wrapping the leg with thread, and then tie it with three knots; then wrap the leg with wool, and then dress the wound with ointment as soon as it is healthy; and if you return to cauterize this ulcer with the cautery called "cultellare", at all points, and make sure not to compress the artery in this ulcer that is not already anchored.
de emigraine	ulcer
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat an ulcer as we have mentioned in divisions of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization does not help and the patient suffers, therefore it is necessary that you hold the cautery called "cultellare" as white as possible; then draw a line of half a centimeter along the leg, and place your hand once, and pull it so that you do not compress the artery and do not cause pain in the bone; and take care of the mandible that is silent when it is cut, and the nerves only move when they are silent and spasmus does not reach the patient, and take care of the dislocation of blood from the artery as soon as it is compressed, or compressed if there is great pain and immediately for the one who does not know, and who is not studied and practiced; and leave the wound in its place; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is compressed, and I will show you where it is treated in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that the cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize the wound in the same way as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization or cautery of the extraction of the artery, with the cauterization that has II cutels; and this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from being cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from being cold, and it is heard of medicines in solution and other treatments that we have said in division, and the pain does not subside, then wash this cauterization which is called "points", and its shape is like this:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, go around the entire ear of the patient, or if the ears hurt in the lobes, and stretch a little piece of cord from the root of the ear until you feel the lobe's swelling; and do this for each ear; after curing the lobe so it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is those that move due to fleas, as we have said in divisions of the disease; and do not make cauterization like those that come from scratching and abscesses of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that is caused by the fleam of eyes and excretions of throat and gargles, and it is not worth, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another at the corner of the temple, and the third in the jaw; and place the cauterization in the part that opens naturally, and make the cauterization where the tip of the ear is in a small hole in the cornea of the ear, and another in the temple as far as possible like some throats; and leave the cauterization as long as it is half of its size; and this is the form of the cauterization.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the dislocation that we have shown before, but it is a little more subtle and it must be that the dislocation is a little larger; after treating the shoulder as I have said, as soon as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is present and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then I make four cauterizations: two at each corner of the head, and one on the head, and one on the lower jaw which is called "vassals" as we have said before, and cauterize on the mouth of the stomach; and treat as we have said before.
de litargie	The first line of the text is "de lit
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large doses of herbs and pills that modify the brain; after that, he cuts off the head of the patient, and he places on the occipital bone the emplauster of snapwort which is written or treated with plasters; and this is the way of cauterization: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is in health, that is good; and if he is not, then you must do three cauterizations on the head as you descend along the neck, with a space of an inch between each cautery; and the cure is done as for others, and if you see another, you make a cauterization at the other corner, and the care is until it is healthy; and if the cauterization called "olivare" is used, as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Of the cold head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be washed with years and what we have said before; then the cold doctor comes to the patient, then the doctor burns the head and each corner, and the ear and three of the spine; and if you have more skill, and the body is dry and the physician is weak, and the disease is far, then make four cauterizations on the spine; and leave it until the least painful part is ars, and gently take your hand; after the cure as soon as it is healthy and is the cauterization that we have called "olivare" that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilepsy should not be used for cauterization except for those who are feverish, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and suffering from poor medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is children who cannot endure, I make a gargle and mastication modifying the brain often with good meat; after I let the child rest in the environment, and I do the cauterization according to what we have said before, on the vein, and on each corner; and if the patient is feverish and suffering, I do the cauterization as I have said to the one who has paralysis and mollification of the corneas, on the spine of the back and collar, and it is the cauterization olive according to the way we have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient's hair is long, then make the incision subtly according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	If the cause of melancholy is superfluity or corrupted and swollen moisture, then the cauterization of parts as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is the declining superfluity of melancholy, and the moisture of the patient's corpse is heavy, then he must drink something according to what the brain is, in the division before.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the patient's corpse is dead; after making a linen bandage well made, as well as the circle, if you put it on the head; and the patient thinks he has feverishness, and should be held in all parts; then present the liniment, and it is good to make a poultice of old hazel; and heat the patient to the temperature that he can endure; then remove the circle by dampening the head, and let it cool; and do this once a week with another government boin as long as it is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	For the fire cautery, you see it being performed by making multiple pricks all over the cauterized area.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization dries out the skin thickly; then it is put on cotton wool and greased with linen grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair of the eyebrows.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When hair comes first as signs as I mentioned in the division, then it begins and therefore drink and then wash the face with something purifying the head, and all moisture, and I do it more times before eating.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to wash his head, and I cauterize his head, and I cauterize on the two temples where the hair ends, or if it ends elsewhere; and cover all the cauterized veins and arteries that are exposed and are long according to the width of the temple; and wash the face with warm water, and if you see too much blood coming out, if it is due to your part being poor as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision the cauterization that you have mentioned; and never is it done to burn or cut off the two bones of the thigh.
dou cors des larmes	The tears of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and flow over the cheeks, or are seen to be coming from the arteries that appear cold and blue; and it is seen that these are superfluous cold fleeting tears, therefore I perform the cauterization that I mentioned at the beginning of the awful descent of the eyes: I cauterize the head, and I cauterize the two temples, and I cauterize wherever the bone is exposed; and if it is done more, then the cauterization is seen to be effective on the sorcil for every small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	A fierce corse of tears through the dens of the hairs.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, therefore, drink malic acid III ounces; after that, leech the head, and I make a cauterization where there is a cautery of olive oil; and I make two cauteries of cautery called "clavilis" on the two sores, a little of the vein; and you wear the artery that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the wound is softened by illness and moisture, therefore it is treated with this cauterization known as "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	And in this case, it forms a shape.
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that I make this cauterization on the two horns and the tails as well; and do not let go of my hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Do not cut the hair that does not touch the wound.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time has come when the hair of the wound is converted into skin, and it touches the wound, and then it is cauterized in two ways: that is, by fire or by an ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then the patient should be in good health; afterwards, he signs on the paper the number of hairs that are as long as the fingers of his hand, and the beginning of the sign of the hair; then he puts cotton wool in a glass of olive oil and musky perfume, then washes the cauterization tool with the form that is:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cauterization on the figure that you have recently and frequently pricked, let the skin be arched at the end; and the signs of health of the wound are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs raised at the point of the oil; therefore, gently place your hand, and leave it for three days, then put a fine cotton on it as long as the burning is sane; after the cure of ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come out, and the paper is softened, then resume the cauterization on the same hair, as you have done before; and if the hairs are long, if the cauterization is done when the paper is raised to its natural point, and is even, and does not prick the hair with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	1. The medical cauterization is the one where you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have long-lasting pain, if the medicine does not help.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the stitching is done, if you lift the leg, and see if the paper is lifted as well as it was lifted by tightening with fire or cutting; and if it is, then it's good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, if you apply more medicine on the leg or the medicine does not reach, as long as your wounds are even and your holes are set; then put on cotton wool in a bandage as much as the wounds allow, after cleaning the leg with the ointment called "dyafenis" and other, as long as it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have the skill to sharpen yourself well in your craft by great care, so that it does not lack any knowledge of the medicine.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then the medicine is applied to the softened paper, as you have done before; after the cure as it becomes healthy; and this is the form of the fudge:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since men are of different sizes and shapes, according to your constraints; and do not be deceived by the right way to this art's study.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work well, therefore it comes that you must cauterize according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in your hand; and shave the hair between your hands in such a way that it does not move or slip; then apply cotton soaked in must or persillon oil to the wound; then heat the cauterization tool that has been divided: and touch the head with the cauterization tool if it forms like a pen point, assemble the cauterization tool as the head is; if you see, if one end is pointed and the other is not, and if you see, if it is like a tent; but whatever, this part that is cauterized is good for your practice.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it swells and its contents are drained and dried. If it remains closed, it may cause the bowels to move; then form the cauterization chip, and hold your hand on the cauterization tool at the part where the skin is bare of oil, so that your hands do not catch fire; and place the cauterization tool in the oil grease, and it corrupts.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterization at the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, continue the cauterization once more, and if you have experience, and let it lie for three days; then place cotton wool on the bride, and apply the desiccative ointment as long as it is dry, and when forty days have passed and it is dry, if apply an ague corrosive medicine so that the bone is exposed; and follow according to what comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that no ancient one has ever said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understands the fistula, and then put in the fire cautery the thinnest part of the skin; afterwards, make a small cut in the place where it is, and you will find the form.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make it to the thickness of a small dot; and hold your hand firmly on the fire cautery, and do not move the patient until the dots have melted and stopped moving, and it is necessary to put the oil on the fine cotton cloth or in a swab: the dot if it is close to the fistula, and the healthy part of the skin.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the fire cautery we have described, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then the physician should administer an enema to the newborn, and return the fistula to its proper place according to what is best for the child's own health.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks in the lips are called "cracks" and the same in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks according to what we have described in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then use a small fire cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the joint in those cracks as much as it can go; after, heal the limb with care until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the groin
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the groin or urethra, or in the roots of the teeth, and it becomes inflamed and forms a fistule; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not heal well: then it is necessary that you cauterize according to the size of the fistule; after the bore or puncture of the fistule, and hold your hand until the fire reaches the source of the fistule, and if it goes in; and make once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, as soon as it is healthy; and if it is cured once or twice, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to reveal the leu and open the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine and it does not work, then place the hard tooth in your mouth; after that wash the cauterization that came from it in this way that you put a nail under the tooth; and remove the teeth from the cauterization with great force, and hold your hand tightly on the patient's jaw so that the patient feels the pain coming from the root of the tooth; then gently release your hand and continue the cauterization according to your will; then fill the patient's mouth with wet earth, and paint it once a day and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the genital area becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture is dried out.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from cold, or it is cold, and the remedies of medicine do not help, then it has to be treated in two ways: either by cauterization with a burr or by fire cauterization.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with a burr if it is such that you have to use a woolen burr from a sheep, and the end in a iron or copper cup; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a needle, and make the tooth bleed slowly and hold it until it is cold; and often I do this as long as the virtue of the root of the tooth lives, and if you see that the wool and cotton are burning in cauterization, and put on the tooth that is sore, and put on iron hot as much as the flesh lives at the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	1. If the fire cautery is such that it burns like a red-hot iron or copper, and is large enough to reach the mouth of the patient; then heat the cautery, and after forming it, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cool. Do this often, as the pain will be less for you or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	2. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with hot blood in the pressure of this cautery, and then it becomes redder; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	I perform the burn as you desire, according to what you can bear; this is the form of the cauterization:
des scrophules	of scrofuly
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofuly is wet and cold, and does not respond to digestion by medicines, then wash the cauterization tool with water after it comes out of the form, and make two openings for the fumes to escape from the cauterization on the other side; and put the cauterization tool on the abscess as soon as it is ready, or as it should be, until the abscess pus comes out; and if the abscess is small, then use the cauterization according to the amount of pus, and leave it for three days; and put cotton on it as soon as the burn is healed, and treat the wound with ointments and poultices until it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the chain:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture enters the channels, and even when it comes from a cold complexion, it is necessary that the patient be treated with soluble medicines first; after that, the fire cautery is applied to the root of the throat, and you should not go too far into the throat, and do not burn more than a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, I perform another cautery at the junction of the collarbone and the head of the spine, and it is called the "clavicle" in our language; and treat the shoulder as we have described until it is healthy.
de la toust	Of the entire
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the symptoms of the disease are cold and moist, and the patient has no fever or thirst, and it is an old disease, then make cauteries on the strong parts in the body; and the other cauterization is between the two ears; and that which is called "clavicle" according to the form mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cauterization by pricking at the entire cauterization which is called "points" according to the form mentioned before in the disease of the ears; and let the points be as many as XXX, or fewer.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the shoulder is healed according to what was said earlier, and this cauterization is done in three rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because they are lighter cauterizations, because you do them in three in a row.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After soaking the patient's back and chest with water; after loosening the knot that was tightening the titillite as it was with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, then cauterize the area with the two ners douqueil as this form indicates:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And cauterize the lozenge as much as it pierces the costal cartilage, and would come to the future dose of cauterization in four cauterizations; and this is made with the cauterization iron that has three needles, because the figure of cauterization is six cauterizations; and these needles are according to the subtlety of a tent and are the form of the cauterization iron that has three needles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is adjusted on this nerve because it has eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After you put the cauterization iron on the nerve with silk, and after the patient rests, and do not hurt the limbs by long tension as long as they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	If it is dislocated, something comes out quickly, so a cauterization is made on the thickest part of the cauterization clavicle, or from the point where the cauterizations are made.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is relieved of moisture and becomes healthy.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When the stomach comes cold and wet as it is drawn to its complexion, and the catharsis is multiplied on it, and the customary treatments are applied, and it does not benefit, then the patient must have the abdomen soaked with water, extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	1. For this reason, I made three cauterizations on the calf of the foot due to the quantity of a dose, at all the cauterization points, and two cauterizations on the costals as much as the cauterizations appear at three angles, and they should be spaced apart between one and another so that they are not joined together as they grow; and they should be the cauterizations if they point to the two parts of the knee, and the figure of the cauterizations should be according to this form in harmony.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	2. And if you see cauterized on the stomach according to this form; and the one who suffers from this cauterization, cauterizes by touching and pressing on the stomach at the point according to what you see; then cauterize all the points that are called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure we had before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver causes pain and moisture and large ventosity, as long as it is properly placed in its natural complexion due to superfluities; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, and he does not benefit from it if he becomes angry with his hateful one; and sign of encephalitis according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, defend the epigastrium, either the cost of the throat comes; and let there be space between each cauterization of a grotesque of a doe; and be the cautery long and not too close to the body; and only half of the moisture should be used on each cautery; and the patient should hold his breath tightly; and if it cannot, if it is crooked, and extends his legs, and leans his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is so, to cauterize these sharp cautery, be you subtle and gentle in the art, and have courage that you do not burn all of it, for you fear to dry the whole body; and that it does not become muddy, because the hair is very delicate in every place, and you see it for the sauce.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has ascended to the liver, and you see whether it is in the liver or in the cloth: if it is in the liver, it feels the heat too much and not too much; and if it is in the cloth, it feels pain perhaps.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	When the treatment of this wound has healed, if the patient's shoulder is swollen; then open the joint or where it is swollen, and then heat the cautery that is similar to the cauterizing iron, according to which form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cautery as much as the skin is burned, and it becomes red, as long as the wound is clean; after the cure according to the cure of the effusions as soon as it is healthy; and it is only necessary to use this cautery with no other tools than those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by these hands these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Indeed, it is not easy to overcome, and I believe it is best to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Dou cauterization of plasters
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must make of plasters, and in this way: take an aristolochia root long, the longest you can find, and let it be dry, and as large and long as your fingers; and put it in oil, and take it to the fire, and cauterize I cautere between the force and the col, and II petis cauteres a pouch descending in the part which is desoz la barbe; and II cauteres between the fifth coste and the sixth, declining derrier a pouch; and I cautere emmi the pis, and I autre sus l'estomac, and I entre II espaules, and II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; and do not press too hard with your hand, as you would smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no ancient said that any man uses a fire cautery like the scalpel, and they thrust it between the ribs, as soon as it reaches the abscess; and then there is great pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, there is pain or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be saved.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have described, and it does not benefit much, therefore there are three ways of cutting that you know.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	1. If you are making three or four incisions, do so according to the length of the hairs, following the cauterization pattern we described earlier; do not press your hand on any part of the cauterization, and let the patient's skin be near his back; another method of cauterization is to burn the one with two nips, as we showed in the dislocation of the shoulder; gently lift the hair that is where the nip is, or where the patient's skin is cut by the tail, and the elevations you lift the hair from, according to the size of the shoulder, according to the length of the chest, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the chest.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you burn the two nerves until the pain is felt from the other side, then take care of the cauterization, and then in it will be eight. And if you see, then cauterize all the cauterization with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has got carbuncle due to long tension, and this is enough that the other treatments before said.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for dropsy, for it is done in the way called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it comes that you must make four cauterizations on the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the intestines, and two at the back of the spine, and one at the anus; and let the cauterization be well near the spine.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the cauterization, let the patient drink long and thin broth, and do not delay the treatment of the wounded man after the cauterization; and the healing will be hastened, and they will all gather together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterization is made on the stomach, either the rib that we have shown before; and on the back, it is an olive, according to what is before placed.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the enflaming of the wounds.
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the wounds are inflamed with water, and are like pus, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the wound between the auricle and the anus; and gently hold the cauterization tool with your hand without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much in front, otherwise the patient's skin will be too tight, and the cauterization should be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make two cauterizations on each leg at the sharp end of the nail; and let the cauterizations be long enough to cure, according to the skin; after the cure of the other cures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When diarrhea comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and absorptive virtues in the stomach and intestines are swollen and cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and having a yellowish tongue, if you make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been said before or on the intestine, around the cauterization; and four cauterizations are made at the subtle parts of all the clavicle cauterizations, and two cauterizations are made on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	When you see much moisture and the patient is suffering, perform the cauterization on the point, and the cauterization on each side, and the burns on the stomach area of the large intestine, as the cure is beneficial when it receives good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are either fundament or multiple, and are old and have large, cold, and moist humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and if cauterization is not beneficial, then: III on the spine of the back, which is completely deformed and uneven, and the cauterization on the bowel II doses; and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the meat is not cooked, and the face swells, then the face on the large cauterization on the stomach, as it is said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the gallbladder at all the cauterizations; and leave the cauterization over long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the patient as much as possible.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the "thelul" charnositeit
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply the "thelul" charnositeit, if the fire cautery appears to be too hot, and then place it all burnt on top of the "thelul" charnositeit; and leave as much of your hand as the cauterizing tool reaches at the vein's birth, without cutting; do this once or twice, and if you have to cauterize again due to "thelul", do it as we have said; after treating wounds as much as possible; and if you use a large fire cautery on the chalk, it will provide more help.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound that was not properly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear tightening or opening, which we will tell you in their language, if they fall ill that cannot be cured by cauterization alone,
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no fistula, and it is awake and has sweat and corrupt moisture, if you prove to have totally covered the wound with a thin tent, and keep it well covered all around the wound as much as it needs.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the cauterization is washed and the burn is removed, and the fistula is closed according to the quantity that enters, and the cauterization is resumed as soon as the wound has started to swell and become corrupted, once, or twice, according to the amount of blood; and the nerves that are involved are warded off, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	The first sentence to translate is: "If the fistula wants to be in the course of the vein and the intestine, if it is made from these parts, and only does this for the abscess, and think that it is not a person; after cure the abscess as much as it is healthy, and if the leus are removed, and the materials are long tendons, then cleanse the abscess completely; and if the materials are not tendons, cleanse the abscess as if it were in its place, and corrupt the bones at the root; and then, as one of these that we will say in his abscess.
de la maladie des reins	Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the kidneys comes on, and is accompanied by large urination, and there is no woman available, then it is necessary that you cauterize the kidneys on both sides with the cautery we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the field, if three cauterizations are made in a row, and they will become more helpful.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is full and weak due to urine, and the patient retains urine, then cauterize the bladder in the part where the urethra enters the bladder, at both the front and back, and make one or two burns as needed; and cauterize the back of the bladder, or two if you wish; and make the burns according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	The term "de la marris" does not
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the man does not have a cold and is not sweating, and does not allow any food to pass through his throat, and his flesh is corrupted and his end is delayed; and when they come, it feels great pain: therefore, it is necessary to apply the fire cautery at the anus as we have said or the cauterization of the vesicle, and then cauterize the back; and if it is a nail, as we have said.
de la hainche	The term "de la hainche" does not translate
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the thick moisture descends to the hamstring, and for this reason if it is motionless from its root, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the wounds are in the department wanted, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hamstring at the anus in the same way as the circle, and follow the leg before the anus so that the hamstring turns around, if the hamstring is in the circle; and if it is the cauterization like those of the stomach that we have said.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this cauterization is not present, make three large olive-tree cauterizations and they should be as sharp as the thorns; and the cure until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	for the pain of the griping
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes from the griping of the belly, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of large humors of fetid pills, or other bones-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the manner of cauterization if it is according to two manners: it is to know how to assemble burning medicines, and to cauterize with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	1. For the fire cautery, if it is done correctly, there are several ways: that you cauterize on the end of the tail, where it is triangular according to this form, and make a deep and large burn, and it should be between each cauterization of an inch for the growth of a dog, and it is olive oil; never done once cauterized on the root of the tail, because there are four in this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	2. And if you see, if the cauterization is made at the circular burn we have mentioned in the dislocation of the tail; but make it in a different way that the circles contain the whole tail, and all its points as they are.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is how it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the buttock and does not reach the thigh or the knee.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And when the pain reaches the thigh and the knee, if the patient feels the pain in the ankle and the heel, and if the cauterization is done on the inner part of the ankle, a small pouch; and if it is the cutaneous cauterization, and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to two points or close to the cautery which is called "points", then the cauterization should be done at the point where the patient feels the pain, whether it is three or four points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is not relieved, then I will do more to it; and if the pain is towards the thigh towards the thigh, then I will do a fire cautery at the cuticle or circular cautery, and you should keep well in all your cauteries that you do not burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I have seen more cases where the ankle was cauterized, and they suffered so much that the entire leg became swollen, the foot as well, and it was noticed and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly, where he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts assembled, make a fire cautery on both sides according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the barber said in the fire cautery of the thigh, according to this manner, make it like this and it should be at the head as big as some nautilus shells or a smaller one, and it should be intertwined and it should be from one end to the other like the edge of a knife; and they should be intertwined in two parts and they should be like noses, and it should have a good-made handle; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be scorched as long as it is all red and glistening, then place it on the handle of the malady's chisel, and make it bend on the costal side; and once the cauterization is done, leave it for three hours; then apply ointment, and leave the wound open for long ten days; after the cure of the ointment, as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use very little of this cauterization due to its pain, and if we use it a little, all of it is burned cauteries, which can be endured, and either he or she will suffer.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The first sentence to translate is: "Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After applying the hot iron to the shoulder of the patient who is gasping for breath, and pressing your hand firmly on the hot iron; after letting it cool in the two circles of the heated awl which is heated in the fire I poc, and leaves it for an hour, and suffers the patient's pain and the shock of the iron.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is similar to burning; and when the burning has passed, ease your hand with the instrument and raise the awl gently, and leave it for three hours, and then put on as much as what is black in the bandage is sore; and this leaves three hours until the ointment is dry; and this would be the end after the cure of wounds as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that marks according to what you have done in the hair; and this is the way of the hot tool, and I have written it or explained the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Mix alkaline and live charcoal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new clay pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or if there is a small hole that the point of a razor can enter; and put some of this clay in another pot, and add alkaline and charcoal and soft ashes, as much as you have until you have enough powder to touch with your hand; and leave it like this until the ash drips down with water or pot plops, then take all of this ash, and mix it with clay and alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	When it comes to treating burns and maintaining hydration in cases of fever and dehydration caused by blisters and other medical conditions, she will make a work that consists of various herbs and plants. For example, she will use horse tail, acacia, mastic, myrrh, and wormwood, all of which are mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a remedy that was used to treat the pain of the scalp and sciatica, and it worked well, and he said that no other cure was needed, and that there was improvement in every case once this remedy was used, and they were bathed as he instructed afterward.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And then, in a similar way, you should preheat the bed with fresh and dry wood, grease it with a little fat, and place it on the shoulder, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and wrap it; and leave it for three hours and as much as the patient does not feel the tightness anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then, insert the dressing as much as the chest is raised, and then enter the bed, and the pain will disappear completely and it will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And cautions that no one should use such a hot cautery medicine after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dicasterides says that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with the horn of a goat, if it helps; and it must be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the fat and melt it with oil, and put it in the socket that is between the little toe and the other which is called the hoof.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dry goat hair and setting it on fire until it is charred, and then putting it on the wool, and leaving it until it is stained; and do this again and continue doing it as long as you feel that it is approaching the hoof, and that the pain is subsiding; and this method of cauterization is called "goat cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from pressing or drumming or too much evacuation, or from the appearance of expanded cold matter, none of these appearances warrants cauterization, but rather it is for those who come from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the patient has been freed from fetid pills or other appearances, to cut on the back of the shoulder where the pain remains, three lines marked with a pin, and in each line, cauterize or more according to the skill and quantity that the patient can bear; and make the cauterization according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see, make III cauterizations or IIII on the clavicle scar according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This malady often affects many children, and the signs of its onset are evident when they tighten their muscles as they grow, and fear; and you see the spines of their backs and the appearance that comes from other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and it is cured, if it is cauterized at the point of this form according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cauterization stains every part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if it is cauterized at the end of the spine at the point where the lines two or three are pricked, and they are points near each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the limb is healed according to what we have said, and you are ready to perform a burn cauterization on it which is in the form of flesh from the spine of a sheep.
de la dolor des jointes	to relieve the pain of the joints.
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints occurs due to swelling that spreads to all parts of the body, and when the pain comes from the foot, which is called "gout" properly, and when it is of a cold cause and medicines do not cure it, then it can be cured by cauterization in this way: make the joints dry with cauterization around the affected joint, and use olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	If it is desired that you touch the face with long and even hair, then the fire cautery is applied to the entire cautery as claimed "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	If the pain comes to the groin and other joints, and this happens many times, then the fire cautery is applied to each groin III cauteries or IV of each part, on the entire olive cautery; and if you have more skill, but do not hold your hand as long as the pain allows.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	If the pain descends to the groin and back, then apply the cautery we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	When the pain is in the hands, if there is no pain after a point on the flesh of II lines; and if there remains no pain, then make points at each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes as costals or espaules, cauterize each part, and govern the patient's behavior with medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good governance and purge the filth, then he will be healthy in the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the face
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in angles, and the wounds hang down as threads and it is new, then it happens that when you see to heal it, it does not come from the belly; and it uses things that make the belly soft, if it comes out of the belly; then make it lie on your back between your hands, and command it to lick its own tail as much as it can, and touch it to your two hands, and sign with a thumb that it is closed at the bone of the dry part, and all signs that are like the half of a circle at the corners of the wounds; then shave the cauterization of the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and feels cold.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then mash the dough with your hands; and the baker signs his hand to make sure they don't return; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put the cauterization sign on all the hand, and hold it right and hold it as long as you touch the bone, and if you don't touch the bone the first time, then continue another time until you reach the bone; and be gentle so that the dough doesn't rise when you make the cauterization sign, that you don't burn it; and so that the bread doesn't burn, or other food.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you question whether when you do not come to the bone at the cauterization, your efforts are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	It is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to the size of the bone, and also great for adults; after three days, cure the foot of the cauterization as much as the burn is healed; after the cure of other ointments as long as it is healthy, and give him salves to his back for forty days as long as the wound is well-sored; and it is necessary that his hair be combed far away, so that the dregs do not come out when he goes to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty years, when he wishes to rise, he should make a well-made girdle for himself, and every fourteen days; and let him rest, so that he works quickly and is not overly full of drink and food, and is too hot; and when he teaches this lesson, it is completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after the care of cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other abdomens and are known, and you see that they are not increasing, then he should re-cauterize according to the quantity, and so is the third part of the keur; after the cure as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	The first line translates to: "But sign the leg and make a line for the width of the fracture, and another for the depth, and hold your hand on all the cauterizing claw.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	The second line translates to: "But the first cauterizations are more gentle and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	The third line translates to: "with less pain in any limb.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	The fourth line translates to: "When pain comes from any part of the body, whether from chill or wound, and this pain lasts long, and medicine does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize at the point called 'points', and to cauterize according to the length of the limb and its thickness, its flexibility, its strength, and its location of knots and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the patient is healthy after the first fire cautery, that is good; if not, restart another fire cautery on the same member, as it is customary for the patient to die at the member that is being cauterized, because it is necessary to perform the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of mollities
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The mollities are helped once by cauterization, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the cauterization, before the disease is at its beginning, and when it is cured according to what we said in the division, and does not tire or become dull, and you doubt that corruption will spoil all the patient, therefore I perform the cauterizations on the head: I cut off the head, and the other on the forehead at the end of the jaws; and they touch the corners, and the backside to the hilt; and it lasts as long as your hand holds the cauterization, and as long as the discharges issue forth so that the vapors of the large humors may issue forth; and I cauterize on the nails according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	When the wound is widespread and clearly visible; if it comes to it, that you cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned or chief, and the cauterization in some places, and the cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and the cauterizations on the spine of the back, and the crupieries and other wrists, and the shoulders, and the tendons of the ankles, and all the joints of the hands and feet, and the fissures of the hands; and you wear bandages that are below the knees, which do not burn, and never made a cauterization on the bone of the thumb, and the other on the stomach bone, and the other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	When the more you do of cauterization, the more help it gives, and it benefits him; and advise that the surgeon does not feel pain in cauterization if it is as healthy as he thinks, because the heart is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it should be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the dough with flour and honey and other remedies as long as it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound comes in any member and is cured by drugs and oils and plasters, and it is not healthy, then the cauterization is done on the member according to its size and smallness; and if the cauterization enters into the spare part of the knee; then the treatment of ointments as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	For no time is it done that the cauterization is made on the hand, arm, and back, at the end of the nerve that makes the member mute, and if it is not pierced, it does not enter; and all this is done without disturbing anything if one knows the members and the movements of the muscles in the body.
de albaras	of barbs
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the art of medicine does not help, then it is cauterized with a cautery, according to the quantity of the blister's size, as long as the member is pierced and remains colorless; then the treatment of flour and lentils with olive oil and plantain flakes, and sand of colon and sand of alendron, of each part; and all are assembled, and bound with a bandage, and applied to the member as long as it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by burning
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the sore appears at the beginning, and you see it stop, if the cauterization is done with the fire cautery that seems like a circle, then it should be completely around the entire sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the wise ones say that cauterization is done in the environment of the sore; and I think this is not bad, because I doubt that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have always wanted this to happen once; and the most accurate thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circumcision," as we have said in the past.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the inflammation that cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays measuring either because of excessive production or due to the patient's old age (too many), and there is little blood, or due to tension; and you see it hurrying to measure: therefore, the cauterization is performed by touching several small cauteries; afterwards, it is left alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hurry to measure.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it hastening to measure, if the cauterization is too hot, then its form is like this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the environment of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization is perceived, and be such cauterization that the patient feels it in a certain way that the course of the purulence is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment when it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cauterization by fire with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a rot of the member, as it rots the members as well as the dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the shoulder that can be burned together with fire, then smooth the cauterizations clavicle as small and large as possible, according to where the disease is; after all are cauterized as much as possible, and nothing remains of it, that all that is corrupted is made bone.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it lie for three days, and put on the burned parts with oil as long as the scars from the fire are not healed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of burns caused by fire.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you do not see healthy char born, it is bad; and if it does, continue the cauterization on the parts that are still corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this disease has never been cured by medical treatment in the place of fire cauterization; but all fire cauterization is greater help, and I have already said the cure of the medical treatment in the division: take what you have mastered.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the porels that come to the pies
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it has happened that the feet are affected by a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that must be treated to heal the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatment of this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is known as fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is when you heat the foot like a hot iron, and it is made of a bow with a hole in the middle as large as the nail can fit through, and has subtle margins; after it is placed on the nail, turn your hand around the nail as much as it goes to the end of the nail; and it leaves for three days until it starts to drip pus; then make a poultice of boiled, salted herbs, and place the poultice on all night, and the nail will be rooted and will be desrooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then care for the wound with ointment, applying it as soon as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then, if the wound becomes infected many times, and in hands and feet, it may be necessary to have a hot fire cautery; and it should be done in this way: take a copper or iron nail, or a feather, and put it on the nailhead and the nailstem, which is to cover wounds; then put the nail on so that it covers everything, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn until the tip of the nail reaches the root of the nailhead, and then find the hot fire cavity halfway up the stem; then suffer the patient a little mordication of the hot fire for an hour; then remove it, and it will fall off at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	I will perform another action as long as you are aware of all these in the course, then I will treat the wounds that are causing pain.
li cure dou trembler	I will cure it so it does not shake.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If the patient trembles due to cold, fever, or another cause, it is necessary that you perform four cauterizations or four on each spine; and one cauterization between each spine; and one at the stomach with olive oil; if the trembling stops and the health improves from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pustules that have appeared.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No time has it appeared by deflowering the corpse, or pustules that come from large corrupted materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary to do a fire cauterization as soon as they appear, which is a subtle cauterization of gummy milk, or if the point is held in the heat, or of the cauterization of lentil shape, or by cautery of Aristotle's root.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And no time is cauterization made at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it does not grow any warts in front, but it is disrupted by the superfluity that comes, and they are healthy; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is tied off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great hemorrhages of blood from the artery that is tied off at the wound that comes to the paraduers, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the fire cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a terrible thing to clean.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And if there is nothing, if you must put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tight as long as it is not calmed by your finger, and does not cause pain; then put fire on the olive-wood cauteries more and less according to the size of the wound, and then I, or as much or as little as necessary to the vein and to the leu where the artery is tied, and put the cautery on this wound or where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery as long as it is not re-inflamed.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If the patient feels pain when you tie the knot in the vein, and the cauterization ends, then quickly take another one that is hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do this one after another until the nerve is no longer tense; and guard your hand so that you do not hurt the patient, and make sure that no other malice comes to the patient's limb; and be careful when you do not cut the artery, as it cannot be well treated immediately if the artery is large, unless it is one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cauterization or by extraction if it is properly treated, or by gentle pulling with thread, or by medicines placed on it that can cause pain; and make sure to hold and stretch it.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will strictly maintain the tightening of the cloth or the placing of things on it, or other similar things, should not profit from it unless.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is none and no remedy or medicine, then he should put his index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly press until it is sore from the wound and the vein; and he should not move much, but often use cold water that is not too cold so that it does not freeze and become painful, and treat these things beforehand that are his skill in cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	1. We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require cauterization, either by fire or burning medicines, and their causes, effects, and forms of cauterizations; and I have made this chapter on the chief chief's own words, and I will go to this chapter by my own way because it is lighter to tell it.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	2. And if you begin this, it is necessary, my friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	3. For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you should not attempt folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For there are many ways of people coming to treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have so easily died with their disease due to the severity of its poison, and its greatness in maliciousness; and from these we must fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these I have seen you do the same, and say: "Wait, I am about to die"; and the disease is treacherous.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It only requires that you allow these who come to you who have this manner, but put more caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not trust entirely but wisely of the things which you are certain, and which you can have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your diseases for the conversion of salus; and this will help to this good reputation, glory, and memory of longing.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three things of great importance, Our Lords, give understanding and straightness to your hearts, and if you will seek the holy inspiration of her hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have commanded this chapter in specifying it as a cauterization, according to what is before or after the cauterization, because you will find it more easily what you will do.
dou chief plein d’aigue	A full head of hair with age.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Scrapes that this disease comes from the child many times in the womb of the mother, and when it is pulled too hard on the head of the child; and never has it come from a cause that has been answered that they do not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease befall anyone but children, and in all cases that I have seen, death followed; and for this it seems to me that I should mention the work of the physician in part of the treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen a child with acute diarrhea, and the father fed him something every day until he could not bear it; and he thought it was the cause of death, and this moisture is assembled between the bone of the skull and the skull itself, from the ear to the skull; and the wounds are such that you should cut a large incision in the head, and so long as the moisture continues: and then the form of the spatulate:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess is larger, then I will make incisions in this manner, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is deep into the bone, and you see the commissures of each part of the chest overstretched, and the water gushes out when you press on it with your hand, and this has not been reported before: then it may be that you need to cut off the head III times according to this manner.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After removing the dressings and powders, and anointing with wine and oil, and leaving it for five days; then remove the bandage, and treat the wound with compresses and poultices, and leave the shoulder evenly bound, and then rebandage the member as much as possible with dry cloth until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to look at or open the large end of the abscess, and the rounded part; for it is never in front; never on the side; never on the back; and never on the side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Make the opening of the abscess and the rounding of the wound according to what you have in your power; and be careful not to cut the artery; and come out with blood, if the patient dies by decompensation of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rumor.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is any disease called "cataract" in the eyes or ears, and the disease is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help much, therefore it is necessary to cure it with cauterization if you cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary, if you can see the eyes, that the patient make a cut in his forehead; then rub the face with a sharp cloth as much as possible until the arteries are visible, then pull the cloth tight around the neck all over the cloth; then look to see if the wound is bleeding, and the blood from both sides are after the ears, and few are returned; then sign the legs with a pinch of a sharp spatula of II parts, as much as the cut comes near the bone, and that should be by the wide forehead.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, pinch the spatula of the artery and wrap it around, cutting as much as necessary, like two did to the bone.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is pierced, if it does not stop bleeding continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open with pressure, then measure the quantity of blood that flows out, and then cut and put it back into the bone; and if it is six hours later, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the overflow of the artery, then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without causing pain, then tighten the wound and tie it, and dress the wound as needed until it is healed.
de emigrainne	From migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When migration occurs, and the veins become thinner, due to moisture from tears and salts in the temples, and the face becomes pale and the same things happen, and it is treated with ways of medicinal cures and nothing benefits it, if we strick the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them if the patient makes the hair on his temples grow, and understands the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is quickly repaired; and if it is repaired, then draw the collar of the patient from the hair of others, then rub the neck with any rough hair, and rinse the neck with hot water as much as the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then gently burn the light leather until you feel the artery, then raise it to the top with pincers, and pull out as many stitches as possible from each part; and if the artery is subtle, then the thread at the tip of the uncinate, then the loop of that part according to the number of II chiefs.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not caught, then it will not be held at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And take out as much blood as possible, about VI c/, and if the artery is large, then it will be held with two strong silk threads of II c/. If the wound is deep, then the blood comes from the wound before the soaked cloth, and comes out in drops; then cut off the excess that is between the II liiens in that hour, and then, if you see, if the cauterization dou cautere cutellaire is as hard as the bone as long as the chiefs are caught; and this is the best work, if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterization is helpful in ending the moisture: because it is of greater help to the moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries is necessary to fill the vein with soft cloth and place good stitches; and when you untie them, if you are careful with dry medicines that make char and tents, as long as it is healthy; and if without cutting the artery as much as you can, if you have to cauterize, or use your leather of vitrol and hold it in your hand that it is not smeared; and if you don't have this present, then put as much as the vein can bear that it is not frozen, and wash the vein with cold water as long as it can bear, and draw it out as it should be; and what is more difficult and lighter in extracting the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery sharp with two parts, but the cuts are well spaced to last longer without bleeding.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the wound is too tight, it holds less blood.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two incisions as much spice as possible, and then when you have heated the two holes, hold them red-hot until it glows against the bone, and close the vein in the two holes; and they should be separated between the two incisions since it is not a good thing to do this cauterization all over; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are stretched by the heat of the fire, and it does not profit at all with medicine as we see, and you see the face of the patient is distorted, and he feels pain in the front as if it were a convulsion; and they are thin and moist so that the paper seems to be cut, and the paper is torn and burned by the heat of the tears, if it has any use for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	1. And they called it the "old bruise cure," and that is to make the patient take a remedy for this disease, which has long hair or front hair, then make three incisions or front equally according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions should be made in the middle of the forehead using a sharp knife, and the others should be made on either side of the forehead using scissors, and keep away from the arteries that are caused by the scissors, and separate your hand from the continuation of the mandibles, and each wound should have three doses of this remedy along the joints; and you will have a piece of sponge and moisten it with cloths for the sore to drain the blood of this disease, then cut the spatulum into two parts according to the form of the forehead.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	1. From the incision that is made in the temple to the second incision; and scorches all that is between the two furrows throughout the entire face that is exposed to the bone, then makes another part of the second incision, and then removes this sputum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	1. If blood comes out in the first furrow with the instrument called "cultivator," and is very sharp on one side but soft on the other, do not sharpen it further, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	1. And the costeit (or coste) slicing towards the car (or track) of the bone, and the coste is soft against the bone, and the blood comes to the second furrow as much as it can to the car.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And cut off all the veins that descend from the wound as much as the incision continues until it is closed, and then another part is made to fend off until the other defense; and then draw out the blood evenly, and express the leu for the blood taken; then put a piece of soft cotton in each fendure, and wrap them with fluffed linen cloth dipped in wine and oil, and keep the wound from drying out; and when the lien is removed, and apply large amounts of tincture of wormwood with olive oil, and other ointments such as balsamic ointment with rose oil, and others used for treating wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	The first sentence translates to: "He takes long and even hairs.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	The second sentence translates to: "For when no cautery wound comes habitually, and you see the hairs thin and short, and the eye burned, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and there is great pain in the flesh, and the maiden grows pale; therefore, one should be careful of these accidents, as those materials and this cautery only cause many wounds, and this cure that it gives is if it is.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	The third sentence translates to: "And if you command the patient to shave his head, then make a deep cut along the front of his head, and another wide one in the opposite direction.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	1. And begins with the burning of the left temple to the right temple, and it is the incision into the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move in the jaw; and when the bone is exposed, if all the blood comes out onto a sponge, then dip between the two lips of the burning and put cotton on it, and sew with linen; then wrap the rough edges with wet vin and oil, and keep away from infection; when it is healed, if it comes to touch the bone as much as possible and begins to nauseate, then the cure of things that are exfoliative, which cause pain, follow.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In one way: take two parts of wheat flower, and eight parts of silk, and make a paste; and apply it to these wounds to heal them completely.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear's sweating
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that is on the ears is one of the four things: grains, or fat, or mineral piercing or similar thing as if made; or seeds, like hairs, feathers, and fleas; or something that flows, like hot water and vinegar and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When he presses on the ear hole or in another way of thing that does not fit well with the ear, and does not grow in the ear, if he puts the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the piercing, and there is no drop of violet oil or wax from it, then the extraction is performed; the patient groans due to the congestion, and their nose stinks when they exhale, and pieces of wool or lint are placed in the ear; the ear is soothed.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	This treatment is often used; and if it does not work, then the extraction is performed with forceps, as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the forceps, it is a success; if not, then the extraction is performed with gentle forceps, as follows: If it does not jump out, then make a small incision in the ear lobe and pull out the hair or the ear canal, and if it does not come out with the ear wax, then make another incision in the ear lobe and pull out the hair or the ear canal; then the extraction is complete, as it often comes out in this way; if it does not come out in this way, then take some gauze and put it on the ears, and do not use any instrument that could cause pain, and put a piece of cotton inside; then press the gauze against the piercing or whatever it is, and extract.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she does not fall from all these things that we have said, if you hold her ear tightly even if it causes spasm and cramp; and the way of fending off is that you first clean the patient's head with warm water and then draw out the blood according to its strength, then place the patient's head between your hands and turn the ear towards the opposite side, and make a small prick at the root of the ear in the grease or where it depends; and the prick should be like a moon, as you move towards the hole, then the bone follows your power, and the saliva drips into your mouth; and the cure as soon as it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grainy and swells, then administer the extraction; and if it cannot be discharged, then apply a damp cloth gently according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make the incision if you think the grain is moist from earwax, as many times as you need; then extract it with soft tweezers and gum, as we have said, if the extractions are healing.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear, therefore, if the patient has grain in the ear, the surgeon should use a cotton wad for cleaning and enlarge the ear with cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let's be cautious with that same ear or eye.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps for this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it doesn't, then take several piercings according to the length of your nail, and heat them slightly; and put the heating on one ear, and press on the other part, and firmly hold another piercing on the earhole; and continue making these holes one after another until the eye is completely out, and then it will jump all at once; and if you see, if it jumps, and take one of the ears, and the other one in fire as much as the more painful one is; then do another part of other piercings as much as the eye is completely out, until the eye is completely out, as we have said in the ear.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the tooth, if it is small, like a pea and similar, it is treated as we have said in the division; but if it is large, it can be felt, after the removal of forceps; and this is the lighter thing to do in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of the ears' rings, if you treat it as we have said in the division and after treating with distillations, and the care does not profit, then look at the ear with the sun: if there are no holes, if you take out the forceps subtly, and if there are, if you take the chain of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be tight and wide around.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And cut the hair more finely in the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient endures, then continue until the entire ear is shaved. Do this often as often as you can.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not yield to the scissors, then smooth it out with cotton wool as we have said in the incision of the verse; and if they do not become smooth as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have used in the decision of the verse, and you will find them or apply your oils and medicines in the ear through this instrument, regardless of the form it takes:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	1. And if it is of silver or gold, the ointment is to be applied to the piercings, and it should be distilled; and for pressing the distillation into the well-made silver instrument, and if you see take the feather and wrap it around the end of the point; then it will grease or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the gourd, and the gourd is in the ear; then blow the feather all over the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or comes from the ear; and it will feel the poultice, and so is the distillations I pouch eschaufee at the fire as well as it can be distilled in the ear; and keep it not too cold, for the medicine will not be good if it is.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the ear's coldness
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without having some ear infection; and this very same thing happens due to the coldness of the ear, or from the cradle being too hard on the ear, and there are no signs of ear infection at any time if one cannot see; and never has there been a case of pertussis, and it is seen very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes in front of the ear, if one cannot see it, is a sign of serious illness in many cases, and then it is necessary to put the ear that is sore with the salve; and look closely: if you see the exudation apparent, if the olive has completely this spumous substance of here, then the form is.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And so, and thoroughly clean both sides, if it does not hurt the ear; if the exfoliation is of char or cors of the ear, if you have subtle pincers, and a light cop, as long as that char is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the exfoliation is completely removed from the ear, if you take a soft, light razor and slightly burn the area, then you put on cors of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the exfoliation that the patient feels pain in the ear, gently pierce, and make sure not to hurt the ear nerves; then put a tent according to the large pus, and apply Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Do nothing until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with hot rose water, and sprinkle it with powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear starting to come out, cover the tent with another soft tent made of oil-based and waxy candle, as long as the ear is still inside; then apply the remedy when it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	2. If the dislocation occurs, dip a sponge in cold water and wring it out, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the dislocation, which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the paper's folds
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the second line to translate:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without dissection, if the cautery is a subtle cauterizing of the hair curler, and the cauterizer after the incision is not harmed; and they are repeatedly repaired, nothing grows from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the grit
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come from papers the things that seem gritty in their form and hardness, and for this it is called "granule" disease, and it is a gathering of large moisture in the paper of its and other parts; the treatment is as follows: first, let the granule rest on both sides, and it is light to know; then make it wide, then burn each part slightly, then take with pincers, and cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	When you cannot perceive a piece of paper with your hand, if it does not cause any harm to the patient; and if the wound is large, if it can be stitched together, and cared for until it is healed; and if it is small, if it does not require much force, as the restoration will be done quickly and easily.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the snow is descending towards the ear to the part below, if reversed, and the snow is grasped with tweezers, and the paper is pressed from both sides; and if the paper is moved by incision, it causes no pain; and when the snow is covered, if the oily salty oil is lifted off, and the ear is cared for until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is engrained in the papers of the wicks, and this happens more often with fewer people, and it grieves their eyes, and they come to the candles at morning, and cannot look at the sun's light because the tears hurry to their eyes; and for this they lie on their sides, and sleep, and are covered in the wet paper that has been soaked by the oil and its appearance is covered in exinach.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your hand on your two eyes and feel the exinach inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	1. And the manner of the incision is if the patient puts his head in your hand; then take a strip of linen and make a circle according to the quantity contained in each part, then put it on; and press with both hands, so that the exudate is assembled inside the circle; then make a mucous environment around the wound, cutting a large, flat slit, no larger than the wound you made at the incision site; and make the dressing as thick as you can see on the wound; and in other arrangements, exudate comes from the slit, according to the form of a small piece of greasy white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	1. Pluck out the thorn with all your might from the piece of bedding that is between your two cheeks, and turn your hands to the right and left as far as they can spread; and make sure you do not push it further into the gum, nor cause it to bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	2. If the thorn does not open at the beginning of the gash, lightly open it as soon as it appears; then pull it out as we have said, and mend the cloth with thread and needles, and sew it to the lobe, and bind it tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	3. And if such men who cut their hair and put on something to corrupt the moisture that is dried out.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the doctor, when he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess comes to the limb, then the doctor should apply ointments that are gentle and suitable for the patient when he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on paper, and they are unnatural, and are watched, if they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as tears and mucus in the papers and albugine, until it is due to the destruction of the hairs; and the cure is done in four ways: either by burning together with fire, or by medicine according to what is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and is made either by cutting and stitching or by stitches and seams, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	1. It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper around in your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then insert an awl into all the holes of the filament; and let the margin of the paper or the hair that comes from these hairs be on the part turned towards you, and turn it to the rasor; then make the edge of the paper, the hair straightened, in all the corners, from the largest to the smallest; then draw out the filament, and put a small piece of cloth and linen on the paper on the other side, then sew a figure on the paper according to the amount you see raised, like the thread of a needle, and it will be necessary that the figure is according to the quantity you see raised on the paper that is marked with your thumb.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If a part of the body that is skilled in handling paper can hold a great quantity of paper according to its stiffness, then cut all the sheets along the lines you have written, starting with the largest loop as small as possible; and if one of the fringes near the natural hairs grows in length, then cut it at one of the two angles, then scrape off the root; then assemble the two lips at a stitch of a needle's eye on all the fine thread, and draw out the sinew; then sew the costure with an eyelet needle on all the fine thread, and draw out the suture, and make air the superfluity of the threads at the two corners for any gluans, if you see this done; and if not, then leave the stitch and the threads as they are for three or four days; then cure the wound with a costure of things that are dry and constricting, because the paper relieves the pain and assembly of the wound, but the costure is dead (as they say the ancient ones), and this is overrated; and if another way: and it is that you see the paper of a figure which is also like the fur of the marten, as we have said, at three or four oncines will follow the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then follow those who surpass in equal measure according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the nails, and the thing is not equal, then use a needle or a thread, and pull the hole; and take another thread of the same length for the great pain, and a smaller one for the little, and assemble the threads evenly; then gently bend your hand evenly, and gently sew all the leather where you have sewn it, as we have experienced, then stitch the corners of the wound by sewing, and treat it as soon as it is healthy; and if the suture comes to your incision, if the pain and swelling are assuaged; and never has the hair of the paper turned: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	1. The patient's treatment for rabid dogs is as follows: and if you follow this form: and then make the cords according to what I have said, and then make the cords by hand, and make them as long as the paper and the large pieces of the spatium are; and hold the ends where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly over the paper of the oil, and tighten the cords of the two parts; and leave no others, and the leather that is stretched will die and become rough and wrinkled, as long as it is on it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, and the wound has force, then the care until it is healthy; and when the wound is healed, and the paper is lifted, and no more hair is tied; and this is the form of the two knots that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The incisions are such that you will use a fine thread, and a skein of fine silk; then assemble the knots and gently insert them, and make the length of the threads as long as possible; then take another fine silk thread lightly, and insert the other knots; then put the needles in your mouth; and if the wound is healed, because it is a subtle wound and small, take the needle all through the chase at the root of the natural hair, and make it percure in the paper as much as you drag the natural hair; then pull out the hair until you reach the end of the chase, and cut in the chase the hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then pull out your hand as the hair comes all the way to the end of the chase with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	1. If the hunted one is treated and the hair does not grow with it, then if you trap the hunt with everything that you have ordered, as long as the hunt comes out with sharp pain and you see it through the vision of the oil; therefore, if you trap and cut the oil and leave it for two or three days, as long as the hair grows in its place and gives birth to the char on it; and if the hair is short, then accompany one long tail with natural curves, and take it with the one that you let go, as long as it is elongated and then tied.
de la porriture de l’oil	2. of the oil's nourishment
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the food comes in the oil, there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it comes through wounding, or cutting, or burning, and through similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of the surgery is to close it by cutting off the suture, and sucking out the leaks from it, and putting on linen tents, and leaving them as long as they are healthy; and only it is necessary to use in the cure of it things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease becomes worse than the first; but it works things that are softening, like fenugreek; and the heat of the water or the altee and the seed of lin are cooked, and all the oils are melted in none of them, and they wrap a tent around the cure.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are if you guard that it does not sound like according to its form before; and these ovraiges that we have said no one has been worse than this disease, that it does not revive according to its form before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the horse that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is called "axacrati" is really called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounding and burning and cauterization and things similar; and the view of the patient in the mirror is that if you look with a needle, if it has two threads, and the thread in the char, and it perceives the opposite arm as much as the other, so that the threads come in the shoulder; then the mirror is at the end of all the needles, and the cap is in the large spatule.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if the paper returns according to what it should be, that is good; but if not, then take a rasps and put it in the file, and turn the paper, and make as many cuts as the paper can bear; and let the heads of the angles of the incision you made be like those of a letter that has no "I griesche"; then do this cut, according to the quantity that your rasp cuts, of the same material that holds the paper, then smooth out the loose parts, and the cost of one thread of linen; then apply the cure that we have said about the mollifying medicines and ointments, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	The patient's illness comes from frostbite or freezing or cauterization, if it comes that you make a simple cut to remove the hair from the papers, and according to what is before; then between the two legs of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the form of the disease, for it is different in shape, and the skilled masters arrange the instruments according to what will return to its natural form; and the illness itself, according to what it requires from the cut and stripping in more positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	It should be done on the paper.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this cauterization comes into contact with paper in a certain way, the paper sticks to the white of the oil and cannot perform its natural functions if you manage to poke the tip of a sharp razor blade through the paper and lift it up; and the tweezers, as long as you touch what is already wet in the subtle spumice, which is neither too much nor too little, so that the patient does not suffer from too much or too much oil, and your incision, which you scrape off that assembled one gently, if the paper regains its natural form; and it is healthy for all of that assembled part, and never once in the acidic cold water, and levigates it with cold sweet water and warm; then put a piece of linen between the paper and the oil, and put soft wool on top of the oil, and use dough and other soothing things until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the bone of the shoulder
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways in which the bone of the shoulder can be: it is nervous and resembles hard sauce, and another that is not nervous but resembles frozen wax, when touched with iron and cooked with pincers, if it does not open; and both seem to end towards the great armor, and grow little by little until it covers all the eye and all the light and the movement of the bone.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision if the patient places his head in the right position, then he operates on the bones; and gently take the paper with your hand, then pinch the bone with small forceps, and hold it at the end; then take a needle, and insert the horsehair, or sheephair, or beefhair, and the thread strong; and double the point of the needle a little and the thread passes through the bone, and perforate all the needle, and tie the bone with a thread and hold it at the end, and scrape all the hair from the costeit of the bone which holds the prunelle and the silk at the chief, then cut the remaining in the root of the arm as subtle and small forces as possible, and leave the natural or armor, so that by the incision does not come to the eyes' tears; and never has the bone stayed in the oncine only, and over time, as we have said; then it is all the spatumile soaked with coi ci is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the scars do not touch the charred skin and break it, and that the stitches are not perceived; then after the incision, a little oil is poured into the wound, and a piece of linen cloth is left there for a few days, and it is left until it is healthy again.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the unguent is not nervous, and you do not push the needle, and the uncini cannot enter, this appearance of a finger is often treated with various remedies; and I have often seen this in division, and if you see it coated, if you apply oil from the ointment of medicine, and take a light piece of thread according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently cut the nail, and if you see that it does not soften and the corner is pressing, then distill from your mouth into the oil made of lard and red wine and the oil will smoke until it touches the other part; then continue with another cut according to this same operation, until it is completely soft.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is nothing against you in the oil, as with a boil, then the milk, and first cure the boil until it is healthy, then continue the incision as before, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is dark in the oil due to great exertion, and in cope a part and not the whole, that tears do not come; then it distills into the oil that is red and bitter, which is made by licking.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the cheek that was pricked by the thorn
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men never prick their cheek, and they cut the thorn and tear the paper and twist the threads, and it looks like a rose of thorns; and if you do not do this, the patient's cheek will become infected, then you cut the ears, and take all those red hairs as close as possible to the skin, and hold them with force; then make the first cut, and continue cutting until the end, and keep the oil away from the wound; and this incision is like the one we said in the incision of the finger, and small forces of coi on the skin, if you follow this chapter after it has been demonstrated; and when the incision is completed and all the hair is cut, if you use olive oil or red wine and corrosive medicines, and put it on the wound with a piece of linen, so that it is assured of healing; and if it does not, and the without chaus runs over you, and you doubt healing, if leave the oil and cure the healing of things that soothe healing; then return to your wound as soon as it is safe, and then make many hairs that are cut in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you treat every weak point of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in fire; and do not force your hand into any of these ways until you see that the other member is affected by that way.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are red veins that are covered by the oil, and they touch the eye's way and weaken the oil for all time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the first thing you should look at is the oil, and since it is weak, there is no other disease but this oil; therefore, treat it in this way: instruct the patient to place his head on your hand, then stretch those veins throughout the entire body according to his wisdom, and make the veins subtle according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And so, cut the bone in degrees according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, gently remove the bones one by one, and let the blood flow after each one, as long as you can see the bones coming out of the fat; and be careful not to cut the fat with sharp points of the spatula, and do this operation at noon before the sun, and work quickly in your operation so that you do not lose any bones; and when you have finished, distill the green and red oil into it to corrupt what is left behind.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot cut all of it in that hour, make a plaster with the oil of things that soothe the pain of the hairs, and leave some jors until the pain is soothed and the aposteme is secured, then resume according to this method as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	He asks if the fistula is called "arissati"; when it is cured by cauterization and according to the hot medicine as I have said before, and if it is not healed, then it must be operated on, and all the moisture that is in it should be removed, until the bone is discovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is discovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, if all the instruments of this case are made according to what is here described, and it is called "sharp chief," and should be made firm in the chief, and should not be cut too much like a lime when it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the bone of the corrupted bone on the other, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand for a short time until you feel that corruption is removed; and do this no more than once, then restore the bone with exfoliating medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is found and not too deep, and the wound of the bowel is found and remains for 40 days, and it does not relieve or become infected, and no other remedy is found than to return the fistula to its place according to this form: then remove a second time from the bone with a knife and with medicines that cause ague, and if it opens after being closed in this form, and the head of the knife is at an angle of 3, and the fistula should be as thin as possible as you see, then.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	1. Then place the handle of the lancet on the shoulder bone, and move your hand away from the oil, then turn the entire forearm until it pierces the bone and feels the pain as if you are holding your hand on your neck; and then restore the dry medicine limb as I have shown you, and when the child is grown and hardened by the use of the lancet, if the matter is in the neck, it will be a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	2. of the issue of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	3. When the wound is completely open and there is no discharge from the bladder, and it does not cause any astringent or emollient, then you must apply the ointment to the wound and make sure it does not hurt by being too sharp; then put on linen made of acacia, aloe, frankincense, and starch, and then squeeze out the ointment onto cloths and bandages; if the bandages are not too wet, double each one into four, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount that the child has used; then squeeze out the ointment through a breadcloth made of fine threads, and resume the bandages until they are dry and do not cause any pain; then remove the bandages and let the ointment be dry for the night and the next day, and if it does not come loose, you can reapply the bandages after the night and the morning; if it does come loose, then you can see that the ointment is healing, which is good; but if not, then repeat the application of the ointment and the bandages as long as it remains healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	A sudden tearing of the eyeball
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a sudden tearing occurs in the eyeball, it opens wide and shows thin paper like grains of resin; therefore, cover your eyes and cut off the root of the part that is most affected by the wound, then cut off another piece if there is a double thread in the part of the eyelid; and make sure, and leave the first piece according to its position; then cut off the double thread and take a part of the eyeball and pull it out well, then pull out the needle and put some ointment on it in a large amount of oil; and leave it as long as the threads cling to the eyeball, and treat the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed; and never again will the wound be restrained by any part of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs grow long and thick, then prick them with a subtle needle that comes from the oil, and draw out the moisture and the blood, and take care not to hurt; then pluck them as soon as they are healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the oil of the bow
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is not other than bows assembled in the oil, resembling acute descent; and it is not truly acute; and the appearance of the dislocation if you make sure that the patient lies on his back and right side, then take the chief between your hands of II parts, and pull as much as you see the bow coming to the end of your hairs; then it should be loose, and not shining, and you will see the symptoms as they come; and if it does not descend, say that it is acute, and if the dislocation comes from the bow is not assembled as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you place the patient's hand between your hands, then take the sharp spatula and make a cut along the corneo-limbal line as far as the continuation of the conjunctive with the limbal line. As the bow elongates, it distills in the cool, warm water meadow (honey), or cool and fenugreek is boiled in honey, then be cured by other means until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the appearances of the waters in the division, and when it comes to measuring; if according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	1. It is necessary that you place the oil between your hands, guided by the light of the sun, and make the healthy and tight hair long; then take the paper of the oil to your left hand, if the hairs are on the right side, or to your right hand if they are on the left; then take in your right hand, if the hairs are on the right side, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the hairs are on the left; then place the point of the instrument at the corona through the hole of a tooth in the blenchor of the oil at the smallest part of the limb; then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and twist your hand until it pierces the blenchor of the oil, and feel that almagda enters the empty space; and it is necessary that the measurement of the almagda hole be at the end of the spice that is on the prunes at the end of the nose; and this is the corona of the oil; if you see the bone in the paper for the clarity of the cornered skin, and then put the instrument where it belongs, or where the pain is, then compress one hole after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he feels pain now, if he sees the surgeon before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, if he feels pain again, open the second wound, insert the forceps with the instrument, and when it is firmly held and does not move, gently twist your hand a few times; then remove a piece of silk thread, and lift the oil from it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply the oil-soaked cloth or linen that is finely ground into oil and a sufficient amount of vinegar, and tie it with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and we who are of our own kindred, put on cloths with a sufficient amount of vinegar.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the bone cannot enter the hole due to its hardness, because it has too many hard hairs, then you must first sharpen the instrument called "alberit", and its form is like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And by perforating only the conjunctive, and not too deeply, but make it subtle, then force the bone, as we have said; and at the end of the work, the patient will feel some pain in his shoulder, and he will sleep on his back in the dark room; and it should be done with all movements, and eat light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and follow his disposition as much as possible; then he will leave this house in the same state as before the operation, and then you must see some things, and then put the bandage back on the following morning; but it is necessary that you do this in the eye of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you remove it, because the pain increases rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When the dislocation occurs, you must slide your thumb forward on the seventh day, and address the one who reassures the dislocation; and when it is calmed, remove the eye and put it in your face or mouth to cover any joint, and be careful in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then you should leave the house quickly and quickly, and be careful that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And some came from Yrach who told us that in some places they made om almagda perciet, but I have not seen any of this in our land, nor have I ever heard of it in old books; and by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	These are the appearances of the forms of aemagd, because those who do not know them by sight; and these are truly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And be the head of this very subtlety, and the tail in three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	of the cartilage that is the knee.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never are born or grown any cartilages that are not of one kind, nor if there are any that seem to be like scorpions at the mouth of the thigh; and if they are of such a kind or have enlarged cartilage of fox color, and if they are of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In those cartilages that are not enlarged and do not grow, it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands facing the sun; and operate on the nostrils, and grind the horn on those cartilages, and extract them; for if you do not hold them firmly with the tip of a very sharp and fine subtle spatula, as long as you feel that this cartilage is still intact.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If there is nothing else that can be done, and you examine all the surgical instruments lightly and subtly, if it does not cause any harm; and if you do not have an assistant, or if you are alone, and you cauterize as necessary and as quickly as possible, and make sure that all the bones are charred and not bleeding, then apply wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If you can operate, and moisture comes to the palace, and you know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, and you have charred bone in the bone, or the instruments cannot be cut: then it is necessary to tie the end of the linen thread around a large nail, and use your hands, and place the patient's head on it so that it can be held; and put the mouth on the child's nose, and let it breathe until it comes out of the mouth; and often make the child cry, and this is a light thing for those who see it; then hold the chin that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other hand holding the chin that comes through the mouth, and guide them one after the other until they are in place.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	1. Do whatever it takes to ensure the child understands that the cradle has been corrupted by the charm, then cut off the child's penis, clean the wound, and apply Egyptian ointment to the penis, then put it back in the cradle as best as possible; do this 3-4 more times until the ointment corrodes all that is left of the charm; then use a plaster of some sort for several days if necessary, and if the medicine is dry, use it; this is the form of the instrument used to purge the child's chest, or when distilled oils and medicines are used.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a dog, and it leads accordingly; and if you see, if a dog is closed, and it has flat ends to expel the blood; and it should have a handle at the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart the need
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times the head has been affected by a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large, until it is seen when looked at; and for this you must first cut off the beginning, and then put on the bone all around, then put on the cautery or hot medicine; and if it is delayed as long as it is large, if it is hard, of a fleshy color, poor sensation: if it is not touched by iron because it is enchanted, for when it is cut once, no harm ever comes to the patient; and if the enchantments are many touches, not of fleshy color, you will see that it can be covered completely, if the patient is quiet and the mouth is open, and cure the patient of things that are dry and restrictive.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is said that when a solution for continuation comes from one of these cartilages, it does not last long and is only beneficial in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary that if no solution comes from any of these cartilages, and the wound is fresh at all its base; then it is best to close the lips with a thread, and treat the wound as soon as it is healed; and if the lips are already scarred on both sides, it is necessary that you remove all the parts of it that are healthy, and then close the lips with a thread, and extract it, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder on it, and burn incense; and put some pieces of emplaustre on the powder, and leave it as long as it does not stick to it, and treat the wound as soon as it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	1. The manner of sewing is as follows if you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in abdominal sewing; or by thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	2. of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	3. that the lips of the abscesses are hard, resembling grains of sand, and smaller or larger; therefore, it is necessary to open the lips, and each tooth is extracted, and they are seized with pliers and held in each part; then use the leve after cutting with vitreol, as long as the mouth is not inflamed; and then the leve of ash, and cure the mouth of dry things as long as it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	Of the thigh of the knee
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the thigh of the knee is cut, which is called "albulus"; if you can hold it with your fingers, and the cloth at its root, and leave the wound or the sanc; then put on the leu vitriole broiet, or other restraining and desiccating powders; and if the thigh returns after the incision, and many times it happens, if the cloth second time, and cauterize: if it does not return soon after the cautery; and these are the forms of the strumens.
des sordens	of the hernias
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	1. No times are assembled at the root of the teeth, the teeth are placed between the cheeks, the gums that are swollen and sharp; and no times is the black and yellow and crooked tooth, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and it becomes the crooked tooth; if it comes that you must place the tooth between your hands, and its roots should be in your holy, and open the teeth or the gums as much as possible, until nothing is left; and then make black and green, and yellow and other stains, as long as they are visible; and if it happens that this is in the first reason, it's good; but if not, then resume in the second day and tooth, as long as you have everything recovered; and notice that the teeth have the skill to different forms of dislocations according to what the patient demonstrates, because the raser that removes the teeth has other shapes than those that are removed between the teeth; and these forms and others are presented with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	1. It is necessary when you treat the patient's tooth pain that you delay until as much as possible, because it should not be done; for it is a substance that is highly juicy, therefore there is no excuse to delay.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	2. When the patient is constrained to eat, if you are certain about the tooth, then...
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	3. Many times the pain of the patient's tooth has passed, and it is certain that the tooth is clean, and the tooth is made to eat; and as long as the tooth is in, because we have already done this for these healthier ones, and when you are sure about the tooth, if it is necessary to cut off the tooth entirely, then make a small hole in the gum of all parts; then the mouth is your tool or has fine needles at the first point and then, as it is well anchored, it firmly fixes the needles; and the head of the tooth is placed in your healthy gums between your fingers, and the tooth is held so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth firmly with the forceps, and if it does not break, then take none of these instruments and pull it gently from each side slightly, and move it as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	If the teeth are perceived and extracted, then it is best to fill them with cloth; and if the extraction is done gently with needles, which does not break the tooth; and it is wise to overturn the gum over the tooth to clean the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you should be very careful not to break it, and there will remain a part, and it returns to the patient through the malice of the root, causing greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	1. And you should know that what they do is not like what the ignorant healers do, who with their haste and their hardiness break the charm never, and they do not harm anyone that we have known; but they bring it once by the fever of this great disease, either by the roots that they cut, or by the broken charm, as often as we have wished; and when the wound is clean, wash the leg with wine or vinegar and salad oil; and if the sweat and blood come out, it often happens, if you use the ointment of vitriol; and if it does not work, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the wisdom teeth, or the first molars, are long and wide at their points and thick cheeks, which do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of large gums if they do not break when pulled, and they should be made of good iron, and they should have teeth to hold onto.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root of the tooth breaks when pulled, if you must put the gum on the cotton-rolled end of the spoon for one or two hours.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the root is polished, put on the needles that are called "algefri," and even if the head looks like a beard; and they should be made as well as a lime and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of all these pricks, then you must pull the plant completely out of the root, and insert the instrument called "athalise", which is also known as a "paling", and its shape is like this:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be sure it is large if it does not break the bone, and if the root jumps on this, it is good; if not, then use all the forceps, and the shapes come after like this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help with this instrument that has two prongs, and its shape is like this:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other forceps that are in front in the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like large thorns, and its shape is like this:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	1. And so it should be that it cannot break, and it is sharpened like the teeth of a saw; and thus with other tools, which are not as good; and the surgeons make their instruments subtle by themselves, according to what their hands and the disease demonstrate, because they have some diseases or the ancients did not teach any instrument for the diversity of things and they do not break due to charret or other bones, or they porridge, if it seeks estruments that I have said, and I help with gestures, of which the form is:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-held to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and rest; and then restore the body of the medicine fitting for this, and if there is in the bone a fissure, and it is small, then all this instrument is enough:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears to not fit the natural body, and its form is misshapen, and at the same time in women with pubic hair, if it comes out after the tooth, and it is not right in the gum, and it cannot be sewn or woven: then cut it; and if it is with the tooth, if it takes this instrument whose form is like the small beak, and is of iron, and is sharp in its head:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And quickly and quickly with the hands, for the pain of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears to be like this, then you can limp, if the leg of a part of the leg like this is formed:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is like the leg of a part of the leg like this is made; and in the leg the tooth little by little with the hands lightly, if it does not move at all, then the end is completely straight, and the tongue is too thin and it crops the tongue, if it can limp the harsh one as much as possible, if it does not crop the tongue does not corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth loosen by pressure or chewing, and the patient cannot press on them because they hurt, and you treat them with restricting medicines, and it does not work; if they can be restrained by a golden thread, for the silver wire becomes green and rotten, but the gold does not move at all; and the thread should not be too thick or too thin, according to the amount of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth, take a golden thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the threads between the rotten teeth, as long as you see improvement in the healthy tooth on the other side; then resume covering the wound on the part where you cut, and gently and skillfully pull your hand, so that it does not move at all; and if the root of the tooth is loose, so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then stitch the head of the thread to a needle, and sew it, and place it between the healthy tooth, and put it in so that it does not bend the tongue; and then leave it tight as much as possible, and if it loosens, or the thread breaks, if another thread is used; if it remains tight and serves for all its teeth, and is the shape of the roots of the two healthy teeth and the two roots of the two wisdom teeth, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is loose, if it is reset in its place, tighten it gradually, as we have said; and do not let it become too tight that it becomes uncomfortable and breaks, and never forms a shape like a bone of a moose tooth, and it is placed where it should be, and the tension is tightened as we have said, and remains tight and serves for all its teeth.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	The first line of the text translates to: "Of the tongue's root, the line".
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No occasion is known to have occurred where the tongue or its roots come out of the mouth, unless by accident of injury; and the language is such that one can make the mouth of the midwife, and it should be in good condition, and the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if it becomes hard or out, and this is due to pain, if the tooth pierces or cuts, and it is due to pain, then the large end should be covered with a piece of cloth; and make sure that the tongue does not become too hot, for the artery that is outside; and when you have done it, if the lip is red and swollen, or cold, then put the tongue under a tent of linen; and the woman should be examined every night, that the midwife may be able to suture.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the dislocation occurs, if they quickly set the bone with vitreol, and if it does not come out, if the cauterization is done at the slow burning cautery, which is suitable for this, then the care of another kind as soon as it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that it is red or black or hard, if the patient does not feel it, if it is not touched, because it is gangrene; and if it is declining into a blenchor, and it is moist, if it sweats the onion, and it is made with a subtle sponge, and the exudation from both sides; and if it does not come out of your body, if you set it with vitreol as soon as it is inflamed, then return to your body as soon as you have dealt with everything; then lift the limb with ease and with a bandage, and the care of other treatments as soon as it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the chin
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Never comes a chin abscess called "godath", and they are properly the second mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not healthy, then hold them: if they are sore, small in size and of a fusse color, and not red with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, but not with iron, then for the recovery of blood; but let it be as long as it is dead, and then you will leave it, or it will break by itself; and if it is a blainche color and the root is subtle, and you have prepared the instrument with copper, but first look at whether the chalz apostemes are resting and are soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then place the patient facing the sun, and their head should be in good condition. The operation of the mouth and the tongue between the hands, and press the lingua as far as all the instrument, whether it is silver or golden subtle also like some counters:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue all the way to this instrument, and see the incision, if you take the tweezers and the finger in the ginger, and draw it further than you can; and take no thing from the tools with it, then the hook to the instrument, whether it is silver or golden subtle also like some counters; and all the chief are corbé, and one place another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron inde or of adamant:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you have needles, then the form is as follows:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let the incision be on one side and the other part named; and when you have cut one of the hams, if you cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, heat the instrument with hot, hot, and acidic water, and the sutures will come loose if the instrument is heated or if burns from green pomegranates are treated, or if wounds from mirts are treated, and similar things, as long as the mouth is not inflamed; then the cure is performed until it is healthy; and never have any other sutures born in the mouth except the two hams, if they are cut like the two hams.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with a wound that did not allow her to swallow, which is to say a small-sensored wound; and she had closed most of the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit that was stopped up, and could not drink or urinate, and died if she delayed for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the wound was so high that it had been stitched with two stitches through the two holes.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I made a cut in the other hole, and took out a large portion of bowel; then I made another incision in the other wound and opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue; after making the cut in these wounds and taking out a piece, there was only a little blood; and then the woman vomited from the throat, and began to drink water and then wine, and continued to treat the wound with long tenths; the wound closed up, filled the socket that I had made, so that it did not hurt much; therefore I closed it and cauterized the throat: afterwards it did not swell; and I left these parts, and only God will do for me afterward.
de l’uve	Of the urethra
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the urethra is drawn out of the urethra, and it is long and straight, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is very large and rounded, it is called "urethra".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When the urethra is treated as we have described in the division, and the treatment does not help, you see that the cauterization marks are soothing and subtle, and it is appropriate to cut it; and that which is rounded and not long; and it is bloody or red or black, and it is appropriate to avoid the incision of the knife.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary therefore, as you see, according to the method I have described, of the patient's gallbladder and length, that you place the patient facing the sun, and press the tongue on the instrument we made note of earlier; then make a cut in the eye, and draw it out, and close it with the two stitches I mentioned in the incision of the two eyes.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut too much beyond the natural termination; for if you cut more, you will grieve the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two eyes, and cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient suffers from cold pain, then you must use an engine for the fire cautery of the affected part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of burning is sharp when it is hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the patient places his head on your shoulder and then presses his tongue onto the instrument we have called the fire cautery in this chapter, and confines it with sharp, hot iron, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin; and then uses the angle of this instrument, then its form is:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has a lock of hair or puts medicine in his mouth, like the mouthfuls of a child, and places the instrument at the entire medicine on the eye; and the patient is grimacing on his chest, if the saliva and muskilage come from his mouth with the medicine given, if it does not descend to the throat and jaw, then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the eye, as much as you see the pain and the medicine's bitterness is soothed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton in the hair ribbon as much as the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and after four or five hours or days, if you have skill in renewing the medicine cauterization, if it resumes, and after cauterizing the discharge into the eye, wrap it in wool, and clean what is outside of the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured with gargles as much as possible.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This remedy is safer than incision alone, only cauterization; if it is treated with fumigation in this way, take vinegar, oil, oregano, rosemary, chamomile, and all or none of these herbs in one pot, and mix them together, and boil; the mixture can be well glued with strong earth, and the pot should have the instrument made according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it can be of silver or gold, and one of the points of the sharp instrument is put in the patient's mouth as much as the vapor rises up the urethra through the urethral opening, as long as the urethra is mortified; afterwards, it often happens again, as long as the urethra dries out, and make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of gangrene, because more things come; and do not make this cut only when the decline of gangrene begins.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a needle and make a hole in the cheek with a thorn, for the thorn will not hurt the mouth too much; because the thorn does not pierce the gum and cause pain to the mouth, and that is a good cure together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened in the throat with a bone or a fish spine, or nothing at all; if it comes then that you must see what you can, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and whatever does not open and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit unless the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it is found by vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and then glue it to the sponge and then stretch it; and when it reaches the mouth, if it slips, and then draw it out; and if it does not come from what we have said, then take the instrument of plucking according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Here comes the translation:
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the dislocation of the jaw
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	There is no such thing as medicine for the dislocation of the jaw, as I said in the division, by the use of medicines; and when it does not help at all, then look at the mouth of the patient towards the sun, then press the tongue with the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the dislocation, if it has all small bones, or thin nails that are worth this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it is not worth anything, then take a hair of your head, and pull on the jaw of the patient, then pull or cut with the hair and make it often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And the patient's skin is marked with fever all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then I see cold fever, and I open the mouth, and the throat feels dry, and it moves often; and if quickly like the naked person feels the fever, then it is.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not have fever as we have said, if the patient is subfuming with asafetida, at the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will feel relieved.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of the fumigation if you see that you have or it has charcoal, and it is covered with a covering in a certain environment, and in the room the patient's head is placed on the instrument; then your fumigation is done, and the patient puts the end of the cainne in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not enter, but goes to the naked person; and the naked person will now be feverish, and if it does not have fever again, renew the fumigation many times; and the patient suffers from thirst, and drinks salty and acidic things, and does not drink any water; and then he performs this service as it should be done by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument used to treat the wound, if it is the case, resembles tacks corbes when seen, like a beak of surgery, and has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and thus the form is:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of the stitches
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The appearances of the stitches are, according to what remembers that they come after one another in this book, and are different in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is in its own appearance itself, and due to it being moist.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is if the bones are broken or they are in the carriage.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	However, the wounds of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the wounds caused by the cart are different from those that come from joints, and each person will have their own judgment in the matter.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if in wounds we cannot perceive, as long as the bowel is alive according to its completion; and if in such cases it is necessary to perceive when they are believed to be dead, and do not die according to their completion, like wounds that are from dislocations.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when wounds come from dislocations, and they are left as long as they are soft and tender, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is due to contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	For the incision, if it pierces the principal member, and you delay the perforation as long as possible before it is dead, it will harm the principal member; or it is due to the foundation, if the hole is not made until it is dead; and one must only cut the incision thought to be completed with digestion, as the one that is due to the foundation, it will not bleed much, and will be long-lasting and will form a fistula; and cannot heal in a great period of time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	It is necessary that you clean the wound of the incision made by the death of the principal member, according to its completion, and when the pain is eased, when the fever subsides, when the pain and bruising are reduced, and when there is debate and ague in the principal member, and other signs; and it is necessary that you sew the wound or more dependent on the incision, and where it was opened; and that the wound be long and wide, and if the incision is made with hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all of them equal or without a suture.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that prick, according to the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the body, if it is necessary to leave the puncture as soon as it is confirmed in digestion completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you prick before this, and the heart comes out of it, and it is painful to defecate; and by chance they harden the lips and become flat from it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no abscess that is pricked according to the size of the heart, according to what the member can endure.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you treat small abscesses, small pustules; and in large abscesses, large pustules, and many scabs according to the appearance of the abscess; and if in such abscesses or they come out with the cheek, and close; when it becomes as I describe it, and is worn out, then it is necessary to do it in the same way as making buboes: and if in such ones that are cut at three angles, and in such ones that are cut like the thorn of a myrtle, like abscesses of anger; and if in such ones or they make a small cut, and other sizes and appearances are covered.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	For the one who does not have a head, if it is a superficial abscess like an abscess, it is necessary to percussion plainly; and when the abscess is large, and it has entered the bone, and it is pierced, if not all the bone is torn in that hour, but only a part of it, then the abscess stops and goes to the other side, and no foreign body is left; this is done repeatedly many times until the bone is entirely filled; at the same time, if the patient is weak in willpower, or a woman carries, or children are small, or old men have decrepit bones.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expectations have never happened once with the end of the bowels, by chance died the patient, and you do not know.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you perceive your abscess, if the wound is large, look at the size of the abscess; if it is a small one, use linen or cotton bandages; if it is large abscesses and has purulent matter, then wrap each in a bandage so that one covers the other; if you have cut a part of leather in the abscess and it has grown out, then fill it with fine cloth or rough fabric from rags, and sew it to the bone as soon as possible, then the bone, and the care of ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the dislocation occurs in the shoulder, if it is not promptly treated with cold and wet cloths and gentle handling, and does not improve, it may lead to further displacement.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation persists, if it is not promptly treated with government and care, and the powders I mentioned in my hands in this book are applied, and if it is not relieved, then you should make compresses and bandages wet with vinegar and olive oil; and if it is like this, and the dislocation is severe, then it is necessary to make compresses and bandages wet with cold and olive oil, or with wine and oil, as often as necessary, according to what we have said; and then remove the aposteme and the wound, and the cure, as it is necessary, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this comes to understanding in the treatment of abscesses: or you have said what one must do before the treatment of abscesses, and now this chapter.
des soros	and desiccated bones.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When many abscesses come and are like us in their appearance, just as the grape of a vine, and they have similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	If they are fat and soft or moist, just like pigs; and if they are hard and rough to cut, and there is no doubt that the patient will not endure it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the cuts if you try on all the instruments that are called "enterotome", of which the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they are made longer by suspension.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is seen, it should not be left with the hair that contains it, because it will move again as soon as it is left alone; then dip the cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; if not, use linen and poultice, and leave the wound, and change the dressing as often as necessary; and the patient should follow the advice given.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then repeat the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the wound, until you see that it does not hurt at night; then treat the wound with ointment according to what is suitable, until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the stitch holds tight, then it is not long; and if the thread follows this form, it should be long; and it will burn your bones, and scorch all parts, and put all your care into drawing the wound closed or opening it; and if the blood flows against it, do as I have said after this.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And if you make an aperture when it is purulent, and cut and care for it as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the opening is made around the purulent aperture and moist, if it is lighter, because there are few stains.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these apertures or heads have no moisture, and these were made by me or another woman of old; and you find the aperture as a sharp, spiny, bluish piercing, unable to be broken; and if none was made, it would have been as good as a piercing.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other cases, when a wound is present or chief, it is better that those who come for the children and the roots of the ears, open it as soon as possible to the most dependent part of the ear, to muzzle the bow; and treat the wound as necessary.
des scrophules	of scrophules
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	There are often cases of dislocation at the collarbone, and loosening of the clasps, and gnawing, and never have they come from another part or been torn, and they are always crooked, and one is crushed by the other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrophule is properly situated on its side, as if the wound and dislocation at the chief were not present; and the appearances of these scrophules are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	It is necessary for you to have tools that contain moisture, and if they are malicious and do not want to follow the health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	If you see the bone in good position at the point, and it is like the color of the corse, and quiet in every part and not rough as the veins or the artery or the conduct, and is not rough; if it comes that you cut it with a knife, and burn in every part, and the lips of the teeth are rough as the nails, then you can do it, as we have said in the apostles; and it is easy and quick, and you are sure that you will not cut the nerve or the vein, and will not be rough, that the hands will not break, and will not see too soon, that you will not cut more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you prick the vein or artery, and it does not let you bleed, then put vitrol beads or any powders that remain sand in the wound, and pull the wound; and leave it until the inflammation is soothed and the wound is softened, and it begins to ooze.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is healed, if it returns to its place, as soon as you have completed it; then wait for your time to indicate if it does not have any small scars, such as cuts and scratches.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if the scar is large, then it is only necessary to cut out that scar at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging without harm; then apply the wound with soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then the cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cover the entire wound, if you manage to gather the two lips of the wound, and hold them now, then there will be no excess because of the size of the scrophule.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you understand how to cover the root of it and draw out, and cut as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scars that have superfluity, perforate them if they are closed or open; and the perforation is done as we have said, depending on the one before mentioned, then use ointments and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what has been cut off; and when the wound is well healed, if the cure of ointment is charged with heat, until it is healthy.
de squinance	Of the glabella
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and talked about the tailoring of the neck; but I have never seen anyone do this in our time, and this is the scripture of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with square heads, it is necessary that the incision of the neck, which is called "epiglottis," be avoided; and this cannot be helped because all the wounds and the pain of the patient are at those who have been struck dumb in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the eyes.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat, it is necessary to cut off the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	1. It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epigastrium, that we cut it in three or four circles or one small cut through, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the cut through without damaging the cartilage; and then it is possible to cut the section of the epigastrium without causing any damage, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	1. And if the masters are too harsh, then it may happen that the neck skin extends to the entire jaw, and then cut the flap as much as it comes to the chin; and avoid the veins of the face, if you see nothing, and then remove the flesh, as we have said; and is demonstrated by the section of the swollen jaw that it should be due to the broken bone of the jaw and due to the lack of voice; and leave the wound overtopped with a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hour has passed since the injury, gather the two lips of the wound as much as they can, and touch all around the cartilage; then administer medicines that make the wound healthy, as soon as it is clean.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim does not know how to do this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the lack of hair.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And since the patient cannot breathe through the epigastrium because of the swelling, and he breathes through the wound, and it is kept alive; and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound over until the malice of the disease is passed, and it has passed in three days or four; and therefore they commanded to suture the wound and cure, as soon as it was cured; and I will tell you what I see.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see that a maiden is in distress, and she bites her lip, and part of her clothing is torn; and I was called to cure her, and I found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discover the wound, and I find the blood that issued from it, and it was well that she had no veins leading to her neck only, and the blood flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried to the wound and cured it as soon as she became healthy; and she did not remain with the maiden until she was silent, and returned later to her place; therefore I say that there is no cause for pain in the tailoring of the epigastrium.
de la grosse gorge	Of the large mouth
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Hernias are called "hernia of the girdle," and are often large hernias in a red color like a rash, and are more common in women; and there are two types: natural and accidental; where natural has no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is of two types, one like being overweight, and the other like a hernia that comes from the artery; and if there is pain, and it is not recommended to wear tighter than usual, but to search for all the introitus: if you tighten as much as I am fat, and cannot hold it at all, if the cope, so as to comply with what is done for the thigh, if there is no, then; and it should be well closed, and the cure as much as it can, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	The first sentence to translate is
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many kinds of us, and I will mention all the similarities; and it comes that I make a difference between newborn and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is chills and fever, as long as the agitations are past, and is accomplished by the belly; therefore, the fever and the chill subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the newborn there is no chill or fever or pain, and contains I sweat, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the cheek, and appears also as a pimple, and becomes large; and they are according to these appearances, either white or moist, or red, and the color is so as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of a newborn, that you examine and inquire first at all the instruments that are called "dislocater", according to what their form comes or chapter which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of examining the abscesses of the body is that you press or more moistly the head of the abscess than it pains in the abscess, and turn your two hands and two feet as much as you can until you feel that the stitch has perceived the keur, then that is according to the size of the abscess; then draw out the dislocater, and hold tight in that which you throw.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	When moisture occurs in the cut, it appears as such, just like I have mentioned for other abscesses; and after the incision, if no moisture comes out, it is thick, so make a cross, take tweezers, and lightly scrape each part of it until the wound is clean; and if you cannot clean it well, then clean it in pieces so that nothing comes out.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing comes out, it returns to us many times; and if it dries up a little, and it does not hurt you, then use some corrosive powders on the wound, pull the wound, and put soothing ointments on the abscess, and cure other abscesses as long as they are healthy; and if it is large, then cut the lips of the wound, and cure what caused the swelling.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	When the vein is opposing or another part, if you hurry and use the glass leather, leave it for II to III days, until the wound pusses, and rest the heat of the sinus; then return to the coper that it has to do without pain.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the entangled stones, and they are of three kinds: large and wide and small; and there are three kinds of them called "albaret", and one called "breb", and there are also three kinds of them: large, wide, and small, to encircle the fistula's openings; and they are like the beaks of birds, and are of brass, or iron, or silver, and are valued according to their yellowness, and are more worn out of black for enclosing the horns of the fistula; and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the largesce of the incisions.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	1. The shapes of the claws are like mirrors, as you see: large, medium, and small; and if the claws have three kinds of beaks; and if the claws have three beaks and are of three kinds; and if the claws have two beaks and are all claws, but are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their legs.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	1. The heads of these are sharp, and of such kind that no other can cut as deep as this, because it burns the flesh, and one does not cut the vein or nerve; and these piercing things are returned to the hands, so that the surgeon does not lose them in the opening of the abscesses; and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are never used except in the legs, like arms, hands, fingers, and toes, and in similar parts; and no other instrument is ever made that resembles the sharpening of thistles, according to this form, because it burns the flesh.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and he puts it back in the shoulder that is strong and has veins and arteries, and never returns to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never have the cheeks of other men swollen when they attempt to straighten them, as if they were the cheeks of women; and they become plump and full-bodied, and those who see them cured think it is in this form of this line .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scar the fat, and use a wound of medicine to burn char, then sew the lips of the wound together and cure as long as it is healthy; and if the cheeks become cold, and are softened by their greatness so that it looks like women, if they are sewn together at the ends of one and the other, if the largest line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to .g.; then burn the leather that is between the lips, and remove the fat, and what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not all made, because the patient does not see to recover, or due to the loss of sang, if you fill the wound with soft cotton in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it absorbs the exudation and the fat, then cure as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	The first sentence to translate is: "Car en l’ovraige de cest chap
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Car en l’ovraige de cest chap
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	This part of the text is not translated as it does not contain any complete sentences or meaningful phrases in English. It seems to be a description of something related to the previous context, but without additional information, it is difficult to provide an accurate translation. Please provide more context or clarify the text for a better translation.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the entire bone in the abscess is visible, use a piece of cotton wool and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat the wound with ointment as needed until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scabs, treat it as we have described in our text for scabs, and if the wound is deep, then use cauterization as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the flesh is exposed that was cut, if many abscesses come, and also the vein becomes empty and abscessed; and if you notice this is from the artery, then the abscesses are long; and when you feel it in your hands, it feels tight; and when it is from the vein, it is pulled apart; and it is madness to pull out this abscess, and at the same time when the bandages and gauze are removed and the wounds are exposed, and there is great pain.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. It is necessary to shield the treatment of fire, and the one who is in charge must also do so, and in the one who is full-grown and has arrows made from sinews of long bones; then cut the tail as you would a cat's, and remove the artery as far as it is visible; then take a needle and pierce it on the other side, and draw the artery through with two threads, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of two arteries in the temples; then release the bone that is between the two links of an introducer as much as it is, and let it be; then apply the treatment that enjoys bowstring, as long as the sinews are tight; then cure this according to its kind, so that it becomes sound; and if the artery is for the vein, then when you have tied it with your hand what you need from the aposteme, take the needle out of your hand and pierce the thread that you hold in your hand, and pull it through, and if it has two threads, then draw it from the other side; then tie the aposteme, as I have said, or one of the two parts of the two sinews; and if you doubt that the threads will not come out, then take another needle at the end of all the aposteme through the first needle's hole, and draw the threads in four threads; then close the aposteme as much as the superfluity comes out, then close the superfluity of the knot and leave what is tied; then wrap it around with fine linen and oil, then apply treatments and ointments as much as it is sound.
des apostemes des ners	The first sentence to translate is: "Car en l’ovraige de cest
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Ous com aposteme viennent en l'artere et en la voine, viennent aposteme en les ners lorsqu'ils sont ferits, ou par trop de travail, et semblent des choses similaires.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	1. And this happens more often with helpers and you should do it in all joints, and that is the main cause of pain, and its color resembles the color of a sick person's face, and it is more common in positions causing pain; and when they are stretched, if they feel pain, and it is not like the pain of a sick person's heart, but rather like the pain of a wound, and they are all quiet, and they do not move forward or backward, and the one who is in joints does not come out easily with iron: by chance, there is contraction; and those who are at the head or front, make the leather with the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the gangrene is small, and it is held with nails, and the copper at its root; and if it is large, and it spreads to the bone, and burns it, then the bone and assembly the wound to the dressing, and the cure as long as it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	large hanging tongues
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never comes in the belly and does not affect any other part of the body, and is a disease called "fungus" by its appearance, and is at the root subtle, and the head is large; and in it there are many and small ones; and I saw one who had them, his belly which was more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and were gnawed, and became infected with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I found them and discovered in one there were 18 ounces, and in the other 6. The incision is made if you look at whether the hairs are moist, and the color of the artel is bluish-gray and moist with a subtle root; if the cope is large, and they are in your presence, the fire cautery is made.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in the cautery, there are often too large evacuations of blood, and if you do not care for them, then you must cauterize; and if you see the hairs spreading and becoming wet from the incision with fire, take a piece of thread well made, and in the artel as we have said, and leave it there; then restrain, and do not stop pulling on the thread until it covers the artel, and work it with your hands; and if the roots are large, if you push them into the belly, but you push only half of it, then cauterize so it does not revive; then cure the wound, and keep the heal that is full of flesh and poor sense and lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are enchanted gums, and I will come to the treatment of this sore after.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the patient is in a state of shock.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of shock comes from cauterization or cutting of skin or face, and is located in the abdomen and sometimes in intestines or arteries according to what is in front, or ventsile; and if it is due to the rupture of fever and the issue of blood, then the color of the gum resembles the color of the corse, and is a light thing with pain, and open to various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed on both sides, it returns, and by chance it becomes larger, and expands to the entrance of the bathtub and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press on it with your hand; it does not constraint you; and if it is due to sand, then the signs are large and hard, and it is filled according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to ventosity, then it is wet at the tip, and the appearance changes according to whether it is the sand of the artery, or the vein, or ventosity.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you allow the treatment to proceed.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of incisions and abscesses, for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of incisions and abscesses, for the artery and the vein. Then you should command the patient to touch their pubic hair with their tongue, and extend it all around, then sew it around the entire intestine; then command them to pull tightly between their hands, then go around the leg that you have signified, then make half of the aphrodisiac at the root of the penis; then secure half of the aphrodisiac with a strong thread or a cord made of fine silk, and make it firm; then pull the other half of the aphrodisiac along the thread, and bite on the intestine; if you release the thread, and bite on the intestine at the navel; if you bite on the anal sphincter, and close the excess; if the artery or vein is against you, or the navel, then return to your work and take two vultures, and pull out two chicks, and pull out the vultures after what you have done as if you are doing it permanently; then compress the aphrodisiac with two thirds of the vultures on the vultures, and if you see, open the vultures, and leave the penis as much as it bleeds, and cut off the dead part by itself; or if it is softly bleeding and oozing, then cure what is necessary, and close the aphrodisiac as we have said; and remove the blood or mucus that you took, then cure the penis as we have said; and suture the aphrodisiac if necessary, and soothe the penis as we have said.
dou chancre	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of the appearances of chancre, and it is noted that one must overcome by medicines, and it is noted that one must use the cure of iron; and we say that chancre is enjanred in the marris, and great caution in its cure, and we tell the old one that when chancres are in the leu or can be rased if as chancre which is in the mameles, and in the cuixe, and in semblances they are all to be done when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and ancient, if not able to approach it, because I have never seen any healing; nor has anyone ever been healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operation, when it is in the flesh or can be opened, is that you never cleanse the patient with black charcoal; then make it cleaner if there is manifest fullness, then cut the flesh at the lower part of the wound to make the operation; then your bones or joints become soft, and all the hair falls out, and the nails of all fall off, and leave the sinew completely loose; let the blood flow freely, and squeeze hard with your hand or on anything, and if the dislocation occurs away from the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize as much as the unclean parts are not affected; then another cure as soon as it is healthy.
de ydropisie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And so, the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And so, the second part. The following steps should be taken: If the wound is at the lower belly, and it does not bleed until it reaches the intestine when examined, and cannot be cleaned; then look to see if the fistula is directed towards the intestines: if it comes that you cut it off from the anus III, it must be done directly above the poignil; and if the fistula is due to liver disease, then it should be cut off at the left side of the anus III; and if it is due to the mucus, then it should be cut off at the right, and the patient's pain must not be greater than the pain caused by the superfluities reaching the weak part of the belly; then perforate all the skin with the instrument, and the bougie, and gently press your hand on all the space between the skin and the sycamore as you would when scrunching up a piece of paper or a small piece of cloth; then perforate the sycamore until the space reaches the belly four times, and that is the end of the abscess, then pull out the instrument, and I bougie is in this form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a silver chain, and is of iron or light gold, and in its part it has a small piercing; and sometimes it has three, and sometimes two on one side, and one on another; and the head is cut so that it resembles a quill, and it is the shape of the incision that the scribes make with the quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the head of the chief, if it is cut, and when it is sharp, and now you see more than it should be in that hour, by chance if the scribe's spirit is resolved in the arm, or if he has weak hands, or if he is approaching death; but according to the quantity of his valor, and according to what the dispositions of his valor mean, and his wounds; then withdraw the instrument and hold the axe, and it is held now by the heat that stops the piercing that was made at the point which I have spoken of, so that you can do it in this way; then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the scribe suffering from this, and take a small quantity of axe; do this every day, and keep away from it as long as it does not last but a little axe.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	1. And if you doubt the patient, and let them rest for a while, if the care of the tomb or sand bath helps, and by washing or bathing and in the sun, and becomes flushed; and the care of drying medicines as soon as they are healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the removal of the fever, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	2. of the prevention of the winter
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	3. No child is ever born without having a cough in the winter, or if the cough is small, or it is not heavy in his chest.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is not perceived at all, even with great care, according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the cloth underneath, and tie it with the string, and leave it for three to four hours or eight, and if you see urine, then collect it and make urine, and then put it back; and by chance, they may not fit, because the urine that comes out will not close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the cloth used is too small, then it should be treated with a piece of cloth, as we have said, if it stretches.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the cloth in their loins are cold because no one is born with the cloth at the top of the thigh, for they cannot urinate before they do not cut off their thigh; and they cannot enlarge because of this, as the material cannot come close enough to the marrow, and it is a serious disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The manner of the wound if the patient gushes blood from his back, is that it is the head of the vein and the copula as big as a penny, if it pierces the flesh, if it comes; and you must prevent the loss of blood that comes often, and if it comes, if the wound is clean, and cure the wound as much as it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	of the vein's pustules
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times, pustules come in the vein, and it looks like a bad appearance; and some are malignant and not malignant; if you must clean them under the subcutaneous fat, and cut and mound all, then put on cotton fluff in Egyptian ointment; then the care of ointment is done as much as it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the tumor is malignant, of a dark color and fast-growing, then you must have the cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	After you have cauterized it, and the tumor is still present, and it has parts that are dense and parts that are sparse, then you must remove the part that was dense; and if it remains, then treat the sparse part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you remove it all together, if you do not ensure that the head of the tumor is not felt, and it becomes black and corrupt in its head and in the surrounding area; then remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply honey and flour made from the scabs of green pumpkins and vines, then other cures as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if the dislocation occurs, then follow this method of lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if the cauterization helps in the following two positions: it is knowledge that the dislocation occurred and the corruption; and if the head of the thorn is corrupted and retracts, then you should either bind or lead the thorn with a string of wire, and let the mucus flow from it; and when the pelz (thorn) comes to the end of the verge (thorn) that has not been circumcised, or has been caused by a wound or abscess, then you should scrape it with the instrument cheveit (razor), as long as the liiens (ligatures) are loosened, and release the chief of the verge from all parts; and if this is difficult to do, then scrape the thorn of the verge and the peil (hair) without any element between them, and then wet the subtle drapeil of lin moilliet an aigue froide (cold linen cloth), so it does not cause pain.
de la circoncision	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a continuous disfigurement like other wounds; however, if we perform this work out of our own will and for the benefit of our children, and in fact it is the best work and the most gentle for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not often circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the greatest part of masters and physicians who performed circumcision in the old way, with force, and at all ages; if it were not for the fact that it causes pain, and by chance if one could not find another, and had to do it oneself.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or they recover quickly, and the pain is double, and at circumcision which is hard for the point of the member; and at the circumcision of the finger by chance it breaks the iron, and causes the wound to open, and many times are born prematurely, and I want none of that.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	The first line of the text translates to: "Of the mondification that is made with forces, I have found the benefit of the experiment, because the forces cut just as well on the top as on the bottom.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The second line of the text translates to: "For when you press your hand, if it cuts evenly in one direction, but that the thread is not too thick on the other side; and that the manner of the first stitch is such that it seems to the child that you only tie the thread around the verge, and then I do so in all ways you please; then I do it right between my hands, and put the forces between my hands or between my fingers that the children do not see, nor any of the instruments; then pin your hand to the verge and blow or sneeze, and lift it up as much as the head of the verge is assembled, then mend well the dirt that is on it, then tie the lew sign intended for a double thread, then tie it to the other lien; and keep it as you do in the second reading in the pouch and the index, and cover between the two threads, then gently pull down the curtain and draw the chief of the verge; then leave the sanc poc and poc, for they are the worst; and put powder on and on powder I put the powder of a dried bacon cooked without spice, preserved with rose oil and fresh, and let it rest for another day, and cure it further as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the incision is as follows: the two ends should be even and smooth, and should be as large as the corresponding part.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the incision is when the edges come out at the incision; therefore, it should be extended to your nail, and if it does not fit well, then it should be held in place with your nail, and then it will hold.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they remain for three days, and the wound is infected, then it should be left to heal as long as the sore does not become inflamed, and it should be lightly scorched; if the wound is as you hold it, and you protect it from the part of the wound, it will not hurt you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient's leg wound should be treated with poultices made from sourdough powder, as we have mentioned or used in the past, and if it does not improve, it will go worse; treat the wound as we have said, as soon as it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retainment of urine.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retention of urine due to dysuria, cystitis, bowel obstruction, intestinal blockage, or similar conditions, as we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine is discharged, and you see the retention by the urethra which is at the anus or columella of the vagina, then it should be noted that the patient's hips are caught on his own thighs; and he should have his legs extended from the back, and his abdomen is expanded from the part below the back, and restricted his hips to the expression of the urethra at the desire of the urine, as soon as it comes, if it does not come, and the patient feels great pain, then it should be noted that you should administer an extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", and its form is: and it should be made of fine silver hair, like the feather of a sparrow; and it should be the tail of a palm leaf about half a meter long, and it should be made fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Here is the translation of the first line: "And the manner of the urine's exit if you take a double thread, and tie it at the tip of the wool or linen, and cut the tip of the thread with the sewing needle; and cut off the excess of the wool and cut the tip of the thread, then anoint the thread with oil or balsam and olive oil and vinegar of garden, and make the patient sit on the seat, and the bladder and the urethra are moistened with oil and olive oil and vinegar of garden; then gently insert the thread into the urethra, as far as it reaches to the root of the urethra, then double the urethra towards the bulb; then cut the thread before the bladder, and feel the patient come out the empty bladder, and this is done according to this order because either the conductor or the patient is tense; then the thread is all through the hair, and the urine follows the hair, then it is drawn out, and the urine is made up; and the siringue resumes when the bladder is empty and the patient's urethra is healed.
des maladies de la vessie	Of illnesses of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there is scorbutus or blood in the bladder, or when there is pus assembled, and you see water and medicines distilling, then do this to all the instrument called "clepsadra", and it is shaped like:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if there are three pulses: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and it is read by the medicine that is so hot that it burns well the verge with addition, if one can draw the moisture, and let it be; and when you see your medicines gushing in the bladder, put the head of the clister in the moisture, and draw it with the drawing which is ens; if you draw the moisture with the clister, and then forcefully draw the traction which is ens; if the moisture enters, and comes to the bladder now, if that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle clyster that one clisters the bladder: if that is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	1. It is made of silver or archaut, and the head is higher; then take a sheep's bladder and moisten it as you see the wetter clisterizing the bladder, then place it between the two seins forming a double-layered boil, and heat the moisture on the fire; then cut the chief down the verge, then hold your hand on the bladder throughout the moisture, as if the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of gauze, make a circle, and perforate it around the center; then pull the strong thread through these punctures, then assemble the circle as you would an arrow, and put what you see as oil, moisture, and salve in it, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand as the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Of the incision
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division of the ways of incision, and the extraction of arrowheads, that there is a difference between the incision as it rains, and those signs, and in what piere we must over it of size; and in the vesicle, and in the wound; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the incision which is more common in the vesicle is in children, and it is a sign that the water has jumped from the vesicle, resembling the jump in its subtlety; and it is open, and grateful to the patient's wound, and it can many times, and then becomes heavy; and at the end of these jumps, the children's salvation is until they are four years old, and it is a grief in the village, and it is as a joint, for those who are between joints and joints; and it is the cure that is lighter for those who have large piers, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	When we come to the treatment, if we first cover the patient with a cloth, we should clean all the feces that is inside the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	Because it never hurts to probe the wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the legs and stand up, and move them towards the bed, if the wound descends to the anus, and there is never any pain in the head; then place it between your hands, with your hands on the thighs, if the vagina is completely relaxed; then feel and touch the wound; if you feel the wound in the surrounding area, now is the time to cut near the wound.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if she does not feel any pain when touched, if your index finger is wet with oil from the left hand, and the marrow is soft, or if it is hard, and the bone in its foundation, and it wants to pierce, and when you feel it with your finger, if the bone at the top of the bladder; then press with your finger, and the bone should come out where you see it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And order the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he orders him to extend his right hand, and his left hand to stretch the bones at the top, and his left hand to pull on the bone where the cut is made; then he cuts the spagetti, depending on what it looks like:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	The patient should be between the ribs and the base, not in the costal arch of the left side; the incision should be made on one side of the wound, and the depth should be at either the base or the foundation, according to the size of the wound, not too large; by chance, if the pressure is needed at the foundation, it should jump with effort; and check if there is any part of the wound or angle that is rough; if it is difficult to exit; and if it is a part that is closed, it resembles a gap, and curves, whose end is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	1. If the wound has angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not spring, then you must pull on the nails that are like a hinge at the base, to tighten the wound so that it does not slip; or you may use a small instrument subtly bent at the base; and if you do not engage it, then enlarge the pore if it is inflamed, and if it is not corded, then use vitriol; and if there are more than one wound, then first cut the largest one at the top of the urethra, then cope it, then draw it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If it is not treated promptly, it can cause a large wound and further injury.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things can happen to the patient: either they die, or urine comes out due to the urethra being unable to close; but you must try to draw it out, or cut it off with scissors, as you draw it in pieces; and when you have completed your work, if you use the incision of frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and extract it, and apply moist oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the wound, then resew the patient at his neck, and do not let the knot slip from the thread.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if the joint is well lubricated with oil and warmth, then apply the final ointment and the base ointment, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if pus comes into the wound and suppurations, and blood clots in the vein, and it is retained in the bladder, which is in a similar way that without urination with the bladder: cut through the wound, and extract the clot, because if it remains, it will cause the vein to rupture and bleed; then cleanse the wound with hot water and ointment, and apply all remedies that you know, as long as it is healthy; and make sure that all the times you treat it, you tie the thighs together, and assemble all the medicines below the knee.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	When the prick is small, and it is conducted by the vertex, and it is checked, and the urine cannot be discharged; if the cure of this that I say otherwise, you cut it many times, it is an excuse for the size of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already done this before.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	I will prepare according to this form and make it at a third angle, if it is not at one side.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie it around the vertex of the prick, so that it does not come into the bladder; then cut the thread on the vertex gently, as it reaches the prick; and turn the thread back to your hand at the prick point as often as you can feel the prick from the other side; if the urine comes, then press your hand on the part that is deprived of the vertex.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bone breaks so far that it is accompanied by urination, and the skin of the patient tightens; and if you do not do this for any reason, then cut off the end of the wound and the other side, then pull out the thread between the two limbs, then remove the suture, and cleanse the cold blood that is in the wound; and treat the patient as soon as they are healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of a woman's wound
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There is only one case where a wound occurs in women: if the woman is virgin; and the second is that it is impossible to find a well-behaved woman who has committed adultery, at the same time that she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	The third method is if by chance one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of hands; and the fourth method is if the woman's wound is more than the man's, because it requires a more perfect size, and great pain if necessary. And if one must be cut, then it is best to know a skilled woman well, and to cut on the right side, and if one cannot cut, then do not cast a subtle mire; and this presents a wise lesson in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and she commands that she does what you command in the incision of the wound; and look well if the woman is virgin: therefore it is necessary to put her duty or foundation and seek the wound; and if she is cut, then she constrains her duty or con with the midwife, and recommends that she puts her right hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If the dislocation is found, if it can be moved slightly from the entrance of the vagina up to the root of the thigh, until it reaches the bone; then, press on the wound at the root of the thigh in the cold part of the thigh, where it is most sensitive, and feel the wound in that area; and do not move the other hand from the wound or the entrance, and make it as small as possible at first, then bite on it until you feel the wound so sharp that the pierce can come out, and press hard on many types of pierces: it is important to know that there are small and large, sharp and smooth, long and short, and those with rough edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you suspect any abnormalities to determine the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If you suspect any abnormalities to determine the outcome. Then if the wound is not infected, apply vitrol with glass fragments, hold for an hour until the wound is stitched. Then return to your work, as long as the suture is firm, and have the instruments I mentioned in the extraction of the suture to help you in your work; if it is still infected, and it is the artery that is covered, apply powder on the wound and bandage and lint, and do not resume this, and leave the suture and do not pull it too hard, as a chance may kill the patient; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the pain of the wound is assuaged, and you read it, if you return to your work, as long as the piercing is healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia cancer
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Hernia cancer is merely a collection of moisture or white saph, which is contained in the ejaculate; and it is called "saph" and has never been properly in the cloth of the ejaculate, if one cares that it is another ejaculate; and this is the leather between the white saph that we have mentioned; and there has never been any.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia is such that it comes with the coions, and it is expanded with that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	1. And never does it come from percussion on the bones, and this moisture is of many colors: either it is declining to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or bluish white, and this comes more; and these are the signs of this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, then the abscess recesses, I long for it to be as long as a bone, and does not open the pores, for it is moist throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	2. And if it has moisture in the same cloth, then the abscess recesses with part of the dough, and because it is thought to be other ointments; and if the moisture is between the skin of the bones and the white sack, then it feels well; therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, examine all the introitory instruments before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to the following, judge what is deprived.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, if the surgeon is healthy according to what we can do, then take the patient and lay him on his back, and place a high thing under his head, and then raise his right side, and command the assistant to hold his left side, and extend the verge to one of the two costals near the ribs, and then take the scarper, and rub the skin of the ribs from the shoulder to the point where it is thinnest, and make it as straight as possible, and then percute the white skin at the large puncture, and remove all the white skin, and then put in your fingers, and clean the wound with the nail, and then put in your thumb, and clean the wound from the other side; and do not touch the ribs, but only the white skin, and rub subtly all around the costeit of him, whether you do it well or not, if the white skin returns to his ribs; and if the wound is deep, then raise the two legs of the patient as soon as you have finished the work with the white skin; then gather the II legs of the ribs together as tightly as possible, and treat them like other wounds, as long as they are healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If the patient's testicle becomes corrupted by another disease, and the suspensory ligaments are loose, doubting that blood will flow; then cut the ligament at all points, remove the testicle, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the swelling is assembled in two parts, as branches; then cut the other part as you have done the first dislocation, then remove the sore, and put fine oil-soaked cloth in the wound; and put another layer of fine cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, and tie it with double-folded strips of cloth, and fasten it to all the parts according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two threads, and use fine wool according to this appearance and they should be assembled by stitching in the groove of the pants, and some of the heads are placed at the foundation's back, and others at the part where the point is; and the other two heads are at the two angles, and all assembled is the restriction in the belt loop; and never has medicine been this way for the fire cautery on the small needle, and that is when you prick the subtle cultivated cautery and cut the leather of the cowhides, and it should be washed as we have said, if the white that contains the ague is discovered; if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the white with pins, and burn it at this subtle cautery chaw:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	1. And follow it in all ways that you can, as long as you follow all instructions; and keep the fire away from the urethra; and check that this operation is done safely; and make sure there are no complications of blood loss, and do not cut too much; and if nothing else makes you against it, such as an incision or dislocation of the knee or another part, then cure what makes you against it, according to what has been said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	1. And if the patient is not willing to follow this advice and does not wait for this operation due to its horror, then if there is a perforation, as I have said, and if you are sure about the meanings we have mentioned that the malleable part is the labia, then place the patient on their back; then perceive the aphrodisiac in the part most distant from all the fleshy parts, and make the perforation as long as possible, and if the wound is large, then cover it with cotton and tie it, and let the drainage of the pus through the wound, then cure as long as the wound is healthy; and if the blister bursts, do not allow the pus to flow into the mouth of the wound, if you can catch it or the instrument with which you treat the pus from the hydrops, because this is in front of you; and widen the wound, and check that the pus returns, and assemble after six months or sooner, and when it is assembled, as before, and then pass the malleable parts through their joints.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of arrows
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Since in the section of this ramification there are many cases of fear, and I think it is better to leave it; I will tell you the evacuation and the appearance of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, all abscesses come from wounds and arrows, and the same is true for dislocations; this is by case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known that the abscess is caused by sour and ague, which is expanded in the joints, or by percussion; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the wound; and there is no pain, and it is a griefful abscess; and sometimes there are grayish-green and purplish abscesses with strange color, and they never come from arrows or inflamed veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is about the vein, if it is cut by the disposition of an abscess, when you press on it with your two hands; and only then can you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	This is made of the vein being cut according to its disposition at the expression of touching with two hands, and can be quite well made in this shape, and in other shapes; and it is that you cope with the curvature of the bones, then the bone is at the top, and the bone is white and firm, and deliver the suspensory from all parts of the bone.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the bone is already curved with these shapes, then it is necessary that you distort the bone and the patient; and if it is at the whitish part, or in the region where the veins are dense, then it is necessary that you deliver all of this, and the patient cope reondement.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is from the lower part of the body, and it comes out whole, and the head is separated, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are completed, if you apply the linen thread oil and rose oil, then proceed with other treatments as soon as it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the boils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a description of abscesses wrapped in a wrapping resembling a broom, with the softening of boils, and the patient is silent with pain as it happens; and the cure of this disease is well done, and we will tell you about the wound of the patient, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	1. It is necessary that you put the patient on his side, then lift the arm away from the body, pulling the sleeve down to your two hands, over all the veins that are near the wrist, and mark the masters, and extend them; then cut with a sharp blade large enough to pass through any vessel, as soon as they are discovered, and then burn each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries in the temples; then tie a needle or if it has a double thread, tie it at the first place where the blood came from, and tie it to the other end; then cut evenly, according to the length of the wound, and remove the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as we have done with the others, if no vein is bleeding, and if all the veins come out, then cut the sleeve at all the veins; if the patient loses his norrissement through the incision of the veins, and seethes and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this dislocation are either by section or extension, or by pulling it out through the abdomen in the area of the inguinals; and this dislocation is either due to extension or from the extension of the intestines, and these methods of causing it come from various causes: either by percussion, or by jumping, or by biting, or by sudden grief faix, and in similar ways; and the signs when it is due to extension of the shoulder are that there are few and far between, in long tenses, and there is no sudden onset; and it is the postmortem equal until towards the font, because the shoulder presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	The signs appear when it is of the sudden facial pain, which brings on at the beginning sudden pain, and are the apoplexies different appearing, less the skin pres, and it is from the end of the intestine and the heart due to the sudden facial pain.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And no time has the circles gone down with the intestine, and it is held in check, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron for pain, because it cannot be escaped.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these treatments of iron for pain, because it cannot be escaped. And the manner of the wound if you command or the patient that it rams the intestine with its hand at the seat of the wound, if it can enter; then so is the wound, and put your fingers in the corner of the wound, and feel around for any bone; then make a cut from the corner of the wound to the end of the bone that is exposed, and then make a cut from the end of the bone that is under the skin, and depart from the end of the bone that is below the knee; and then pull the left hand down on the knee, and put the white wound at your right hand, and hold the knee with both hands, and put the white wound above your left hand; and command the servant to stretch the knee up, and release what is below the thigh; and if there is not any white wound or hard bone, and you do not find anything, then put the needle or a thread of four threads in the anus after the intestine; after the knee, then gather the children that appear as threads, as many as there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in cross form, and in the white wound, which we have said is after the intestine, with a strong cord of two parts; then enclose the children of the threads, and form them with two parts, so that no vessels that are cut can enter into the wound, that the thread does not live; and make the first long cord according to the second long cord, and after these two cords leave the white wound a large portion of the knee; then after all other sew the stitches; then close the part that is white after the bone, as much as it can be without being too tight or too loose, as we have said before; then oil the fine thread and put it in plasters, and put the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is it burned with the white sulfur that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the line as it is; and if it lags at the wound, if it is washed with hot water, and what we have said is applied as soon as it bleeds, then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carcinoma
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this matter, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made in such a way as the vis which is assembled by the ramus, in the same manner that you tie the veins, after slightly cutting them at the root; then cope em mi, and cure the abscess of that which operates, until the veins cease; and the cure as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	1. No time comes with rupture of the grievous wounds, as we have said, and open it; and no bowels come out of the intestines, and if they do, it's nothing, and repair all hours; and if it lasts too long in this point, it thinks the wound or syphilis, as the bowels come out; and this is due to the extension of the gut which is grievous, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and flattened and apert the legs and openings; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and no time is cured in this manner: and it is that the patient groans on his back between your hands, then cope the leg of the rupture enlarged according to the quantity of III doses; and then extract the gut which is dried out of the skin that follows, then take the raiment and put it on the leg appearing dried gut, and press the two legs dried gut against the belly, then cut the two legs apparant dried gut according to the belly's belly, and cut the one and the other; then extract the belly's belly, and do not compress the dried gut or extend the uterus or anything else, as we have told you in the cure of the wounds of the intestines; then the cure is by the cure of the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, if the wound is cleansed and treated, as soon as it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sue is confined, and has no appearance in the fracture, and the cauterization is harsh in this part, and more distant from health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the leather of the shoes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the shoes is softened in no way, because the charlots that are made are softened, and it can be seen; and it is the work of the maltreated, when one sees the maltreatment of the maltreatment on the back of the patient, and the maltreatment of the leather that is malleable on the natural leather; then assemble the two lips at a seam, and if you see, cut first the superfluity of the softened leather in three or four seams; then sew between the seams, and cure it as well as the other wounds, until it is healthy, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	1. "For the fire cautery,
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	2. "For the fire cautery,
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	3. "For the fire cautery,
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	4. "For the fire cautery,
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	5. "For the fire cautery,
des hermofrodites	The term "hermofrodites" does not have a direct
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	The term "hermofrodites" is used in two ways, depending on the context: either when it refers to a state where between the two lips there is an opening similar to that of a woman's, or if it has hair, and never once in the act of urinating.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, where they have hair as a virgin and the lips.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of the throat and face is when you cover all the loose hair with something and treat it like other wounds; in the second way, men whose urine jumps through the lips have no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the temptation
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Temptation is an incantation used on the natural part, as it is too unpleasant to see; and no woman has it as strong as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you apply the excess of temptation to your hand or nails, and lightly cover it; and do not make it too thick, so that it does not cause harm, then the cure of another cure as long as it is safe; and on another char that is in the mouth of the wife, and the emple, and by chance it jumps, and it is according to the appearance of a kowe, and for this it was called the ancient "kowe's disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it comes to your mind that you copy it, if as we have said, the remedy is curative as soon as it is healthy.
de erratique	of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If it is an error of nature, if the woman's character is not clear, or the pulse is weak; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come; or it is due to chastity, or subtle desire, or espies, and is made in the marriage bed, or in the costume, or elsewhere, or for other reasons; and it happens during conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flow occurs; and the knowledge of this is by the regret of the womb.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated, if you want to reset it yourself or ask for help.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the pain is subtle and the dislocation is easy to reach, if you are quick, and the dislocation is not far: bring your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the dislocation as much as the subtle pain allows, and as the dislocation stays; then take a linen cloth, and put it on the shoulder, and lift the woman's leg for each day, so that it does not stick.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the pain is hard and fast, then you must tap the shoulder as if it were a sack of flour.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the wound is deep and wide, if the pressure is on the onyx and the cup; and take the medicines that are staining blood, as well as dragon's blood, incense, and a large amount of urine; then make a poultice of it, so that the wound can heal; and leave it for a long time, and then make a tent of dry linen; then cure with other remedies until it is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	2. And when the wound comes to char nee, if the covering is found according to this method, it is not because of enchantment.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	3. For the enchanted covering that is in the wound, it should not be touched with iron.
des emorroides	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Emorroydes are openings of veins that do not usually occur, and when they become old they turn into thrombosis; and we have said in the division the appearances of aus, and the signs, and I will say those which require care.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that emorroydes and thrombosis, when they are formed in the arm, do not appear by touching, if it is not by the care of a surgeon.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are in the mouth of the arm, can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	1. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then remove the nails from the horseshoe, and cut off the roots of the horse, then powder some medicines restricting blood, such as ice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour water on her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if she loses blood, it comes out if you make a decoction of sumac and the root of grapefruit, apples, and pears, and similar things, and then take flour of barley, mix it with honey and hazelnut, and apply it on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	If it is dislocated, it is bad.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If it is not dislocated, make the patient lie on their back and massage gently to avoid hurting; then take the joint, and the milk in the juice of plantain or aloe with wine vinegar, and massage the joint.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is healed, if you dress the leg with ointment until it is healthy; and the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the sharp end of a thorn, if it corresponds to my saying the thistle, then you dress it as I said until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Of the plaices of the arm
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	There are many types of wounds that come to the arm in the marris, such as chancres and abscesses, herpes, gashes, fistulas, and blisters, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, it is necessary that I treat the gash wound that comes to the arm in this chapter, which is not different from other wounds that bow; and if you see the evil of fire, look at whether the wound is already at its beginning when it comes, and signs of chill and fever, and if it becomes red, you will see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	For this reason, do not hasten to percuss, but make him endure as long as the pain is assuaged; then place the patient on his side, and have him lie on two pillows until his thigh is straight; let his knees be widely apart, and support his back and assemble his heels at the end of the thigh; let his fingers be expanded, and put his hands on his knees, and tie them well with a belt; then move the instrument towards the left side, and after that comes the form; it is necessary that when you see him handling this instrument, you fix the first part to know the fitting of the marriage bed, so that what enters through the instrument does not fit more than it should, and does not distort the patient's hand; and if it is larger, it is necessary to cover the fitting of the marriage bed with cloths, so that the patient is not grieved; and it is necessary that he places the handle of the instrument at the end, and draws the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	1. And when the abscess is opened and it is touched with a clean hand, if it covers the head, apply oil to the wound; and when the bowel is seen, if it comes that you must put tents in the wound softened in olive oil or olive oil, and put the tent for the wound at the end of the mare, and put it on the mare and on the cut nail smoothly washed with cold or warm ointment; then the cure after two days of dressing, as long as it is healthy; and never lift the mare and the wound by a cloth of cold or honey, and then of cold or roots of licorice and aristotle are cooked; then repeat the dressing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed in the marriage, then you must not cook with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbearing
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Mastery is first in the dance that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see the woman press against the wall, and desire to smell the aroma: therefore, help the children to be born; then you should know that these children are according to the natural figure, and they are from his own offspring, and the second one with him; and when you see these signs, it is appropriate to gently press on his belly so that the child is soon; for when he descends from his head, if it is with his second one, and is monied by good cleanliness, then this marriage comes otherwise naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes upon its own accord, and it comes from the heart or the head, and the hands, or it comes from the stomach or the intestines, and it is converted by chance in his collar, and through other malicious figures; if it is skilled in the dance that it is wise and subtle in these things, and it warns of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures so that you can help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child is born naturally, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and her virtues are weak, if it is placed on a stool or in women's hands, and she is cooked with olive oil or fenugreek, then the dance begins between its two little spatula, which is its form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the second one, and cut as far as the moisture that is being cut; and insert the woman's belly as much as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to close the woman's muscles with ointment of fenugreek; then it should be applied and squeezed with a bandage, and hold the mouth and nose for an hour: if it is now the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the hands come out further, then it is necessary to lightly reset them a little at a time; and if they do not enter, then the woman should sit on the bed, and lift the feet up; then pull the bed down on the ground, and tie it to the woman so that it does not fall; and if the hands cannot be set, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the point that is before us, and take the child out, and reset it as evenly as possible.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the issue of the child with its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes with its feet, if it can be held at the top; and then the nail is turned a little by little until it is even; then it grasps the feet and extends them a little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	It cannot jump as quickly as it can run, if commanded to, and I make it slower by commanding; if it jumps, God sees.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump if we have said so, and the torso is small and proportional to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For therefore it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	For therefore it is light. And if it does not jump if we have said so, and the torso is small and proportional to the natural figure, and with muslin of fine thread, and oil of linseed, and gum resin, and burn it all in a mortar; and then make it according to the nature of the female form and harden this treatment, then put it on the neck until the costal bones; and when it is softened at the costal bones, make it a collar of iron, and put it on, and leave it for an hour; then put it on the seat, then make it smaller and force the mouth and the nose, and press the belly lightly, because the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the issue of the child from its groin
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if he puts his hands on it repeatedly; then hold it by its neck, and let it hang down, and let it be quiet; and fold his hands close, and then press his hands on his belly, and press his knees together as much as possible; and if the child does not jump, if he holds his feet and bends them, then he bends his belly forward, then catch your hands; and hold the child close; and command the woman to pray as long as the child is like this.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the outcome of the child who comes out wide with a hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	The engineer must bring back the hand: if he cannot bring it back, then I will make the woman stand up and go; if she cannot go, then I will make her sit on the bed and spread out her legs; then I will relax the muscles that I have described; and if there is no child, then I will make her sit on the seat, then study to bring back the hand; and when the child is born in its natural position, I will make it smaller, and I command that it be squeezed as much as the child can bear.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child at its neck, and its hands have expanded, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the nurse stains his hand, then turns it slightly and lightly; and when it is equal, if he applies the oily nature of aloe and oil, as we have said, then he commands that it move slightly and lightly; and when you have done this, if the finger is placed on the seam, he commands that it press; and the seam is closed.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner to all the subsequent ones.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this manner in all the subsequent ones, if the second one is caught in your finger, as long as the moisture is present; and if the child can be held on his face and neck, then the bouge (movement) of the baby should not be held, and let the child lie down, as you have done, and command the woman to press no time: therefore, it is lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Said that twin births occur many times, and never in the third or fourth; and this is a strange thing, and few have come across it.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are strange, and do not live long, and have no name; I know that they are multiplied, and are produced by the faculty that decides them, which is linked to the body; and they never issue naturally like all at once, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born well, if the cure is as we have said, and is the subtle dance, and does it quickly and lightly what it does; and does it in such a way that it is worthy of salutation.
de plusors enfans	The phrase "de plusors enfans" translates to 
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	De plusors enfans" translates to "No children are formed in the marris I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and they are all formed as a child by the measurement of the old glorious wife, and cover the whole body because of chance, as it seems; if you follow this, then.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you care for the woman of the dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to cut with your hands; if it happens that the woman is of good health and has not died accidentally or has pain, if it happens that the woman is lying on her back and her shoulders are inclined, and her legs are raised; and the midwife applies the teign de II pars, or she lies in bed if she is at the child's descent; then gently kiss the mother's mouth with oiled oils of rose and musk and fenugreek and lin seeds, then remove the oils from her hands with these oils and musk; then squeeze her hands lightly, then take out the bones that are flexible in this way, and if the bones are in the wrists or elbows or neck or chin or beard or chin or eyebrows or face or behind the ears or on the cheeks, and the child descends at the head, then the bones are in the hand or on the wrist or in the mouth or on the chest or in the mustache or in the side of the face; and it is necessary that the bone is held in the left hand, and place the ring between the two fingers of the right hand, and the bone is applied lightly to all hands, and do not forget the bone in any of these places that we have mentioned, until it returns to the empty state; and this is the shape of the bone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find the other bone, or if you are skilled at it, when the extraction is equal; and then the joint should move equally on both sides, by moving in one direction and then the other, and the bones should be held with your teeth, as shown in the figure:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part is broken off, and one of its two bones is missing, and the other is left, and the other part; and if it is not broken off, then place this bone or higher up, and do this until all are removed.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by force, then you should wrap it around as shown in the figure, until it is entirely; then the cloth in the joint of the heel or elbow, and then you should do the same with the other hand, and you will have both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	When the head of the child is large and misshapen, or if there is a swelling assembled, it comes to pass that you cut between your two hands, and make the head and draw out the swelling; or you draw it out with the instrument called "almidach," which forms with the forceps or chaper alongside this; and then, naturally, the child is born with a large natural head; and then, if necessary, you separate the bones with pliers, and the child jumps and is drawn to the force of the pull, as much as the moisture that comes out; and if it cannot be born, if it is hindered by pieces in the mouth that you put; and if it is bent to the belly or side of the chest, it comes to pass that you cut as much as the moisture allows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	If the child is on its back, if there is a gentle attraction, and the swallowing of saliva is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If the child is stomach or intestine, if it covers that you extract with the hand gently unwrapped; and when the stomach or intestine, as long as the moisture that it is corre; and if another member is osteit, and the head is demoure, then bite the mouth of the mother with the hand, and draw out; then i bite I oncine or II, and the tooth draw out; and if the mouth of the mother is retreated due to aposteme chaut that it has come, if there is no difficulty, then manage things that are moist and heavy; and the manager emplaustres, and siece in aigue mollifians et amoistans.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its chest, and you can set it evenly, then do as we have said in the live child; and if there is no harm, then the part that was broken will be healed by pieces, and nothing of the second part will remain.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if the child is broken as we have said in the scarlet fever cases that come to us; and if there are other pains, then let it be kept in bed with strict diet, and it will heal from other cures.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly some children had died, then consulted another about this, and he said that death was the cause.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the wound, and they grew as soon as they were seen, and began to increase in size.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went for medical help, and I thought it was long, but I couldn't heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong pressure with my hand, and after a while, there were some bones, and then more and more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised, because this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If you thought it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wished to see the wound, and as the woman was better; and she showed the long time it took for the wound to heal, and I don't remember this chapter except for this reason, because when the master made an unusual thing, I thought I should help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the dislocation back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Then comes the form of pressure, where we close the books; and then it turns with the heads of the bones.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Indeed, the corners should be more subtle and restrictive, and should be made of a flat or round surface; and the mouth should be no wider than the width of one tooth, and the edges of the wood should be as long as the length of a palm and a half, and the distance between them should be a half palm or more; and these distances should be evenly spaced on either side of the mouth to open it when turning the corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	1. Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of flat or square wood, according to the appearance of the nails; and it has two heads, as you see, like a palm of the hand, and they are wide; and when you open the marrow with all the instruments, if you place the woman's head on the table and her legs spread out, then adjust the heads and the thighs together in the marrow, and hold the handle of the instrument steady between its handles; then use your hand on all the instruments as you did with the nails evenly, according to the quantity you see open the mouth of the marrow, until it feels like it is fitting as you see.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all surpassed in their appearances, and the more they are examined, the faster they work, and the higher the cost for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument that you have not yet examined, because its requirements are not easy to meet.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second child is born, if you command the midwife to hold the child's hair, and then pull it back with your hands, and fix your eyes on the nose and mouth; and if it jumps, that is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If it does not jump, and I can, and make an incision or curette, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the woman, such as sage, rose, anise, chamomile, calamus, and centary; all these herbs, or any of them, must be cooked or boiled in water; then put a needle or curette in the woman's mouth, and the other end in the baby's mouth, and hold it there until the vapors come out of the baby; then pull it back, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second leap is too high.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment, and does not improve, then order the patient to massage their left hand with oil of sesamum or musk, and then apply it to the second leap; when she finds it, gently stretch it a little at a time, so that the joint does not slip during extraction. But it is necessary to move it lightly to the right and left, and then pull; if it comes out and swells.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the joint is tightly closed, we have said that the treatment is to stretch and fumigate with herbs; and if she does not improve at all from what we have said, do not pull too much; but it is necessary that what is in the mouth of the joint, you tie it to the woman's thigh, then anoint with tetrafarmaçon ointment; if it perforates and returns, and comes out; but all the same, when it perforates if it comes out with a bad smell in the stomach and head, and makes the patient sick.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If, however, it comes to necessary fumigations for this: no of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cresson and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is that which is used to fumigate the woman with the retention of flowers and the secondine if this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it seems like a dog, and it is placed subtly in the nature with the heads wide open, and the limbs large before the fire; and it is the fumigations with charcoal, and the smoke as much as it is gastee, and it resumes another one.
de percier lou fondement	to perceive the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	A child that is born without a firm foundation, often becomes intoxicated with subtle pleasures: if it manages to reach the dance where it perceives that pleasure at its due time, and does not lose consciousness from intoxication, and does not touch it with impure hands; then it should be treated with a mild ointment of wine and oil, and the cure of the wound as soon as it becomes healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not come back, if you put a collar around its neck and let the leash loose, and keep the child in the room when it sees the other children playing outside.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And no time comes coldness of wound or abscess; if it comes sounded: if you cure, if as we have said of the dog's bark.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula deeply founded
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the deep foundation are nodulation, and grow as if coming from the deepest foundation, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when this nodulation is old, it moves, and becomes moist and bloody or subtle, and never are these fistulas permanent; they are known because of the ejection or ventosity when the patient evacuates, and by chance in some cases.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	If there are fistulas that enter the uterus and the other half of the vagina; and they reach the junction of the cortex and the neck.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	If you cannot find the fistula at the base, and it is not present: then use your index finger or a thin needle or a piece of iron in the fistula when it does not have any kinks.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	If there are kinks, then use a small needle or a piece of horsehair, as long as you feel the needle or the hair in your hand; and if you do not feel it, and there is no vomiting, no diarrhea, and no abdominal pain, as we have said: be sure it does not perforate; if you hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula is present in the bladder or led by the ureter, and if the urine jumps, and cannot be soaked by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is felt at the joint of the uterus, if it is led to the limb; if it is not tortuous and the invention of the pain enters, if it is that it is expelled by the bowels, and no medicine can soak by rubbing; and in these fistulas there is no cure other than labor, and the vanity of the proud who intermeddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not a true fistula and is an old one, with hope for health by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient's pain comes between your hands on his back; and he lies down with his legs until they reach his sides, and his sides are inclined to his belly; then make a tent of yarn or plank, if there is tortuosity, as long as you can or the test comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	1. If the patient feels pain at the base, it is necessary that you touch your index finger, and if it feels like it is trying to grasp; and whether you discover or feel between your thumb and forefinger, then you should grip it firmly; if it cannot be cured, it may be broken.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	2. It is not possible to cure all wounds, but this is quick; and if you can help, it is done by making the cauterization subtle according to the size of the fistula, as said before; and the blood flows through the fistula as it rises from the base; and repeat this 2-3 times until you feel that these charred parts are hard, which resemble a quill; then the treatment of softened wounds begins, as long as those charred parts remain, then the treatment of ointment is applied and smoothed.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is in good health, so be it.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is not in good health, it is so; and if he tries to enter, and does not penetrate the fundament, and enters your door and tent with a thick covering of char or smoke, you will see the fistula at this point where the covering ends; if the cope begins at the beginning of the fistula, and goes before the tent, and then cauterizes after it, as far as it reaches to the top of the tent; and it will be delivered from the tent, and will be hurt; then the curves that seem like a feather’s quill will be mended, and there will be none left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If you cannot bear it, and cut between you and the wound, if the cauterization is by fire or by medicinal heat.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauterization, there are two things to know: the force of these hot irons, and the coagulation of blood and the stopping of moisture; then the care of soft tents made in burr or in the skin, as long as it does not become soggy, and is kept in place by the cauterization; then cure the wound of dry sores, which are hard to heal with dry char, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if an abscess comes to be near the fontanelle, and it is moved away from the chest, if the head is heavy or the fontanelle, and inquire about this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and enter if it is the cloth or the sack or the chariot, if it was only a sign of hope and expectation, by the administration of one of the three ways: if you cauterize as we have said, or if you cut it near the fontanelle, or if you push it through the tents and cure as we have said; and do not go too far in front, if you do not burn the part that holds the fontanelle, and let the discharges pass through the desired sense; then the cure, as we have said; by chance if it becomes healthy, or you remove that covering and the mundane then when it is coped with the foundation of the fontanelle, or by tent or another appropriately equipped instrument; then deflate the char that is in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to prolong the fistula in the part that is further from the fontanelle: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And no time are fistulas made in this way: and when you reach the end of the fistula, it is either too costly to mend with leather due to its depth, or if a tent is made at the head according to this form.
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And if you cut it in two, and make a tent at every fil in the fistula as it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is persan in the margin of the deep fistula, then take out the fil in the puncture, as you reach the depth; and cut off the head of the fil, and assemble the two ends, and pull them apart, and leave one or both; and do not restrain it ever, as long as the threads cope with those that are between them, and catch; then cure the wound as it is sore and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perceive, if you try to feel in all ways that you can, it will not be too difficult.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to make the stitch too tight if it fits well, and then the care, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the sharp spiny thorn from which the fistula was made is long and thin, and on the other hand, if it is not possible to find a suitable one, as you see in this case:
des emorroydes	of emorroydes.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Needle-like spines, which are sharp and thin, can be classified into two types: those that are embedded in the foundation, like resin grains, and have small and large ones, and those that are cut at the base and have one or more, and are deficient at the base and at the top of the base; but those that are deficient have very little moisture, and are cut at the base with a few drops of turquoise or a few drops of wine, and have the color of corns; and the care of those who have made them deficient in the foundation is that you order the patient to sprinkle on chambers as much as the foundations are, until the filts appear, and if you hurry, and can take them with your nails or keep them in your nail, then cut at their roots; and if the uncine cannot hold them by their moisture, then take them to the side, or to the cloth, or from a piece of catapult, and then cut them and powder some hot powders that are in the leu of cauterization; or you cauterize as it is said in the cauterization chapter, and treat them with other treatments until they are healthy; and if the foundations cannot issue, then listerize the patient's mouth with a sharp and spicy clister, and wash the area where the foundation is or is located, so that it can issue openly; if the mouth is not seized, and the filts are firm at the base, then it is the lighter cure; and if you seize them with your nail or with your nails, then cut them and treat them as we have said, until they are healthy and do not fear incision by fire.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is intended to mend the seam in this manner: take one thread, thread it through an awl, and then pull the thread out from the other side, and turn the two ends of the remaining thread around the awl; and then tighten the thread, then pull the thread, and draw out the awl, and make similar adjustments on all, and leave the corner rough so that excess blood is removed; then put oil or ointment on the foundation, and put it on the foundation, and command the patient to lie down; and then leave it as long as it does not hurt, and when it will be sore, if the cure for poison and other remedies are needed, as soon as it is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	1. It seems to be a description of a medical procedure involving fire cautery, where hairs are allowed to grow
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	1. There have been many times of diarrhea in the intestines, and by constricting it, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If it is necessary to remove a splinter or thorn from your finger, which does not allow it to dry; then treat it as much as possible until it is healed; and if it cannot be removed, continue the extraction as soon as possible, until it is clean, and is burned; then treat it as much as possible until it is healthy.
dou fremit	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Antor is a small appearance that should appear in the chest, and it moves with every breath; and no time does the fever disappear, and it feels like death's trembling, and it comes throughout the body, and more than the hands than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the remedy is that if you take a thorn from a goose feather, or a very sharp vulture's feather, and put it on the trembling, as long as the purple circle encircles the trembling all around; then turn your hand over all the thorn so that you cover all around the trembling, and put it in place, and cut off the roots of the trembling.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	If you see, if I make a needle of iron or steel according to this form, and it is subtle and thin:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	If you see, if the cauterization moves, if it is in front of or in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clyster.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No time has it been made of silver or archae, or of melted iron or hammered; and no time has it been made of these small and large bowels, according to which they are distributed.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, these are made in the treatment of children and weak and painful ones, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and great clister is such that when it is large, the belly is lined in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a deviation or the belly is lined in this manner: the head of the clister is visible, and the shoulder is dislocated perceived; and it is at one of the costals, and at the other; and it is the belly or where medicines are placed in a vessel of a beast or parchment, and all the holes of the small pertus are perceived, and between each pertus there must be a spice, then weave through each pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort in X or more entor, and assemble the belly as if it were a swine; and when the medicine is given, if the line is at the instrument before with a strong thread, then clisterize; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	1. And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or unguent of urine or similar thing, then gently apply it; then the surgeon takes his two hands and assembles them as much as possible, until it is all done, then he removes the clyster, and gently supports the patient's legs at the pillow, and if the medicine comes out, as much as it can; and if the patient sleeps a whole night, it will be more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if you clysterize the patient with a disease of diarrhea of the stomach, and the medicine comes out, if it recurs as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the swelling is either from the foundation or the gangrene, whether it is the clyster also subtle as in a child; and this is the form of the subtle clyster that is drawn when the skin is stretched.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said the cure of wounds in the division; and you will say the cures of hands and medicine, according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the tools or weapons used, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the point of the weapon, and the size of the spearhead or lance, or dart, or javelin, or other things; or they are made according to the tools of the hands, as if a wound is made at the neck, or at the shoulder, or elbow, or side, or belly, or liver, and other members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds on the shoulder, because the reminder will be in his chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or head, and the bone is not broken, if it is due to bleeding or similar things, and the skin is completely torn off and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt of hemorrhage: if the head itself becomes healthier than the affected part; and avoid the physician's surfeit of wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not become healthier, if the meat is anemic, and does not drink wine, and does not eat char, and puts the wound on fire, and comes with a thin ointment, either of oil or vinegar only; and if it does not come with a post, when the wound is fresh and not moved by the air, dust, which I will say a little later; and if the wound is moved, then puts on some gargles, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	When the wound is large, like that of a spearhead and its surroundings, and the lips cannot be reassembled by tents, if they can be reassembled by stitching, just as I will say about belly wounds, by sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is discovered to be bone, it can be pulled out, and it holds only by a point, if the nail; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hardness in the leather of the shoe, and order the patient to eat large meats, such as testes and cooked flour, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	When you touch the skin, and it does not reach the bone, and it causes pain, then the cure is to apply a poultice of herbs. And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, if you need to stop the artery, and you loosen it with a thread; and if this does not help, if it is cauterized.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the lightest cure is sufficient: and that you apply this poultice that has the smell of herbs.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of the poultice is: take a part of incense; mix with three parts of dragon's blood; and three parts of live chalz, and the fine powder, and apply to the wound, and draw it together as much as it can and stick to all its edges; and then close it well, and leave it to dry, so that it does not ooze if it swells; because the medicine is not used until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never has it been done with any tool alone, when there is no incense or sacrifice to the dragon, but that the art has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the art has moved the wound, at once in this way; but do not use my powder; rather use some digested ointments or flour made from barley and honey, as it bows down; then continue with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then use fine tweezers to remove it; and I will tell you more about this later in the chapter on major fractures.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound of the shoulder
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	A wound comes from the shoulder
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the shoulder, and there is no other cause but to treat the wound, and do not restrict anything, as it will retract itself; and do not put anything on the wound, as the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of this with the brain is the more sensitive members; but if the medicine is cold, like lavender in gentle water, and mixed with rose oil, and lavender washed in gentle water, and other pierces of this kind, and moistened ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, and it is bound with bandages, then the care is as long as it takes for it to heal.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wounds are deep and long, and they are full of blood, and if the vein is pierced, and the artery is cut, and the blood comes out, and it is stopped, and the wound is cauterized, and the spine of the neck is cut, or the teeth, and the mouth is guarded, as long as the tooth is in the jaw of the neck, and it is not touched but replaced according to its natural figure; then the extraction is performed, and a few days are left, then the care for dressings is done as soon as it heals; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, if it wants; and if there are pieces of bone, if they are not too large, and those that cannot be, leave them as long as the wound is sore, and it is dressed and becomes healthy and sound; and if the wound is fresh, and powder is applied as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there is an abscess in the wound and it has been incised, as I have described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of the arrow or the spear.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If the wound is of an arrow or spear, and it is gushing blood, then look at the wound and see if there is any signs of death: if so, then the wound is mortal; and if it is not gushing blood, and it is fresh all around the wound, then do not delay in applying the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with the wound, but keep it on the chest, and observe the patient; but if you have no ointment, then put cotton in the wound to dry out the moisture, and make the patient sleep over the wound for three or four hours, or more, until the spasm or trembling of the chest does not cause any discomfort; and when you see the bones in good order, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wounds and other treatments as necessary to make them healthy; and if it cannot be made healthy, cleanse and dress it with what has been used before; as is necessary.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is a cut or puncture with simple blood flow, and it is in front or on the back, if the treatment is by the one who is in front; if it is large, use poultice; and if it is small, use powder, and if it is in the bone, and if it pierces pieces, if the wound wants to be exposed, and if they are not exposed, let it be exposed if the extractions are removed; and for other wounds of other members, judge as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre". The translation of
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre". The translation of "dou derrompement dou ventre" is "great and severe abdominal pain, no intestine ever being torn once, or the intestines being torn, and the wound is more painful, and never a small wound is as painful as a large one, because the intestines are repeatedly inserted; because the intestines swell so much that they feel the sting, if they are inserted more often, and because it causes more pain, because the intestine is frequently torn, because the intestine is frequently reinserted at its place where others have been. And there are four ways in which the abdominal pain is caused: the two common wounds come in the abdominal wound, and the other wounds of the belly and chest are also common, and all of them are more severe with the abdominal wound, and I will say one each and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no inflammation in the intestines, and it is difficult to set, this is one of the two ways: either because of the size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is twisted due to the blow.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is twisted, you should treat it in this way: soften a sponge or a damp cloth only, or wet it with hot water, add vinegar and salt, and gently pull on the intestine until it unwinds; never force it, and it will come out easily.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	When you see the inflammation departing, if the intestine of the anus or anus and rectum are cooked, it is because this is the cause of the entrance of a little thing; and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound with the instrument on the cut, and cover the blood with the dressing; and the first cure is to cut off that part, which is not necessary to cut off in great necessity, and this is the stranger for the fence: if it cuts through the neck and does not close, and sees its form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps, if it is reset according to its natural form in its own place, you will be well off, because this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower abdominal region, if you want to make the patient lie down on his back, and raise his legs higher than his chest; and if it is in the lower abdominal region, then he should raise his head and legs higher than the parts below, and thus he will strain his abdomen in one of the two parts as agreed upon, depending on which part is higher; and it is necessary to administer what I say in large and gaping wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wound is small, and it is in the lower abdominal region, if you want to make the patient lie down on his back, and raise his legs higher than his chest; and if it is in the lower abdominal region, then he should raise his head and legs higher than the parts below, and thus he will strain his abdomen in one of the two parts as agreed upon, depending on which part is higher; and it is necessary to administer what I say in large and gaping wounds. If the wound is small, then it is necessary to sew it with a needle, and assemble the lips; and this is the common way of sutures, and it is that you prick one or more needles, according to the size of the wound, then leave the end of the wound free, and pass one or two threads through the end of the wound, as you sew the wound from that side; then assemble the ends of the thread with the ends of the suture, which is the skin of the wound, as far as you can sew the part, and assemble the ends of the suture in four places; then pull the thread tight around the needle, then assemble the ends of the wound with the ends of the suture, and leave the end of the suture free, and pass another needle through it, as you have done with the first needle, and continue doing so according to the needles you have, until all the wound is closed; the needles should be fine, between subtle and thick, because the fine needles penetrate the whole skin, and the thick ones do not enter well; therefore they should be fine; and it is not necessary to insert the needles too close to the wound and the skin, because they can cause the wound to open before the suture is dry; then sew the ends of the needles, so that the patient does not bleed while sleeping, and put covers or blankets on the ends of the needles, so that they are held in place as long as the wound is sore; this way of sutures is more comfortable for small wounds, because it is common to use one needle or two threads for the second suture, and it is necessary to assemble the ends of the skin with the ends of the suture, and the ends of the suture with the ends of the suture in four places; then pull the thread tight around the needle, then assemble the ends of the wound with the ends of the suture, and leave the end of the suture free, and pass another needle through it, as you have done with the first needle, and continue doing so according to the needles you have, until all the wound is closed; the needles should be fine, between subtle and thick, because the fine needles penetrate the whole skin, and the thick ones do not enter well; therefore they should be fine; and it is not necessary to insert the needles too close to the wound and the skin, because they can cause the wound to open before the suture is dry; then sew the ends of the needles, so that the patient does not bleed while sleeping, and put covers or blankets on the ends of the needles, so that they are held in place as long as the wound is sore; this way of sutures is more comfortable for small wounds, because it is common to use one needle or two threads for the second suture, and it is necessary to assemble the ends of the skin with the ends of the suture, and the ends of the suture with the ends of the suture in four places; then pull the thread tight around the needle, then assemble the ends of the wound with the ends of the suture, and leave the end of the suture free, and pass another needle through it, as you have done with the first needle, and continue doing so according to the needles you have, until all the wound is closed; the needles should be fine, between subtle and thick, because the fine needles penetrate the whole skin, and the thick ones do not enter well; therefore they should be fine; and it is not necessary to insert the needles too close to the wound and the skin, because they can cause the wound to open before the suture is dry; then sew the ends of the needles, so that the patient does not bleed while sleeping, and put covers or blankets on the ends of the needles, so that they are held in place as long as the wound is sore; this way of sutures is more comfortable for small wounds, because it is common to use one needle or two threads for the second suture, and it is necessary to assemble the ends of the skin with the ends of the suture, and the ends of the suture with the ends of the suture in four places; then pull the thread tight around the needle, then assemble the ends of the wound with the ends of the suture, and leave the end of the suture free, and pass another needle through it, as you have done with the first needle, and continue doing so according to the needles you have, until all the wound is closed; the needles should be fine, between subtle and thick, because the fine needles penetrate the whole skin, and the thick ones do not enter well; therefore they should be fine; and it is not necessary to insert the needles too close to the wound and the skin, because they can cause the wound to open before the suture is dry; then sew the ends of the needles, so that the patient does not bleed while sleeping, and put covers or blankets on the ends of the needles, so that they are held in place as long as the wound is sore; this way of sutures is more comfortable for small wounds, because it is common to use one needle or two threads for the second suture, and it is necessary to assemble the ends of the skin with the ends of the suture, and the ends of the suture with the ends of the suture in four places; then pull the thread tight around the needle, then assemble the ends of the wound with the ends of the suture, and leave the end of the suture free, and pass another needle through it, as you have done with the first needle, and continue doing so according to the needles you have, until all the wound is closed; the needles should be fine, between subtle and thick, because the fine needles penetrate the whole skin, and the thick ones do not enter well; therefore they should be fine; and it is not necessary to insert the needles too close to the wound and the skin, because they can cause the wound to open before the suture is dry; then sew the ends of the needles, so that the patient does not bleed while sleeping, and put covers or blankets on the ends of the needles
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I relieved the intestine, and it had been twenty-four hours since it was injured, and the wound was fifty years old, and the doctor treated it, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the nurse measured the pulse to see if it would stop, and it was a miracle; and I did not use any medicine, as there were none in the league where no one was found, nor any medicines; and I washed the wound with vinegar twice a day, and the cotton swab with honey as much as it became healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you will tell me the two most common ways of sewing: take the needle, and pull it through the corner of the fabric; when it has perceived the right direction in the right direction, if the point or side or where you pulled the needle is not straight, and make it pass through another part of the uneven part; and the stitches are understood if you do as the tailor does with the fur, and leave once the seam one way, and take it back again, until the stitch is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	1. The second method of sewing, which Galen called his own, is done in this way: if anyone does it correctly, they bring together the two ends naturally and apply one of the corners of the thread to the other, like this: make a needle or corner of iron approach close, and only the two threads of iron; then turn the needle, and make it perpendicular to the part that is most dense, as the two threads of iron; then make it perpendicular to the part that is most dense on both sides of the thread, using other corners of iron that are on the other side; and this is the better way of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	1. If the patient hears this speech and no one testifies, then it is necessary to sew the abdomen around the needles, or they should be tied in each; and it must be one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those that are twisted corroded; and it is feared that when the rupture is near the abdomen, it is more painful than other bellies.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	1. The judgment of the wound is whether it is like the judgment of other wounds: and if you truly touch the fresh wound with all its sutures, unless it has moved, then reinsert the intestine and the bowel; then put on the powdered charcoal, and if it has moved, then apply any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is bowed; and cut the thread, and be sure the stitch is tight, and the knot is secure; then cure the wound as you would with other wounds, as long as it is healthy; and if you have no medicines, then put them on, as much as they come out of the bowels, a cloth full of vinegar, and rub it twice in the morning until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no other skill in other positions than wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not become infected as the principal members, then it comes that you lightly apply oil of temperate chalor, or oil of rose, and put on the bandages, and loose the garter; and if there is pain or soreness in the belly, and many times it comes, if the clitoris is cleaned with red wine, and at the same time the soreness comes to the intestine; and the perches are pierced, and sauced that when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The small intestine that is called "young" cannot heal until it is cut, and this is due to the fragility of its walls and the subtlety of the entire body, as well as its proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the horn jumps out of the wound, and it is reset as the intestine is fresh; and if it becomes thick and turns black, then you must lie down the black part that is in the wound, and the heads are hung from the side of the wound up to where the extraction is made, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the bursting of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine bursts, and the wound is small, if it can be restored with a few stitches, because I have seen that some were healed or wounded by a lance; and this was the wound on the left side of the stomach, and it became a fistula and the egestion and vomiting passed through it; I treated it according to what I could, and did not stop subtly until it was healed, and I examined it.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it healed, I doubted that the patient had no harm in his belly; but he had none, but delayed in better preparations, and drank and ate; and they said to no one whoever had a small wound in the intestine, that one must clean it in this way: first make large knots, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the mouth has overstretched it, put it between the lips, if it pulls the mouth between them; and then tie the knot, and hold it so that it cannot slip, and then make another twist in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed; and then close the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	1. If the end of the intestine is inflamed and causes no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a thread as fine as a hair from a beast, in this way: take the end of this thread from the intestine that is loose, and then tie it to the end of this fil line of silk, then cut the thread with the needle, and sew through the intestine, and then knot the intestine; and this manner of stitching is not harder than according to the course of love and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the large intestines, if it does not become gangrenous or infected, it will be enough if it is subtle.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	That all wounds and abscesses, when they heal, are called fistulas, and also when they are thin and have a small opening.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the belief that it must be hard and wheal-like, and one feels pain, and is as thin as the tail of an ostrich; and never with a clear opening, and sometimes wide; never small, and sometimes large; never shallow, and sometimes deep; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that all wounds that are not healed and do not hurt, it is only because of one of the seven causes: it is to know, because of the small amount of pus or blood; or because of its malice; or because it has too many bowels, which does not allow the wound to heal; or the lesion is porous, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or because of the property in the region is delayed digestion, and delayed health, and runs through nature; or it has voines or os: and I have shown all these causes and their signs and cures with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	The correct translation of the given line is: "And it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas, which is made by human hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	The correct translation of the given line is: "Fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, arteries, nerves, or the subcutaneous tissue, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes to affect a part of the body's original member, and resembles these.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	The correct translation of the given line is: "And all these fistulas of this kind are of bad omen, and only labor and ignorance; and if there is no fistula that does not come from the part I have mentioned, and you are seeking the cure, and you see it applied, then take a nail or a piece of iron, if the fistula is straight, as you wish; and if the fistula is bent, then search for it with a very fine needle, for the points are bent in the bending; and if the fistula is in the hands and you do not find it well by needles, then take a piece of the pertus where it is, as it is more cort than any other part of the pertus, and makes it whole; then you will know if it is bone or nerve, and whether it is smooth or rough, and ask the patient to tell you about the pain he feels when you press his hand with yours, and the leu or where it is, and whether it is far from the joint, or the nerve, or the artery or vein, or any of the parts I have mentioned, if the coping is according to what I have said, and then the cure will be safe and the charred parts that are corrupted will be removed; and then the cure, when it is sound, and the fistula is well made in its right place, if you cop with your hand as you press, then take fine needles in medicine ague, and insert them at the end of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that has been added to the fount; and then take clean ointments in a healthy jar, as it should be; and if it is not healthy, then the cauterization is done as we have said, and if the os is corrupted by the fistula, then the coping is done as we have said.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If you have pain in the bones or limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is discovered, and it becomes corrupt and black, as long as the corruption remains, treat the dislocated parts as if they are healthy; and when they become healthy, return to normal; and if they are not healthy, then be aware that you will have to do this: if you dislocate the bone and want to put it back in place as soon as possible, and remove all the corruption, then restore the bone; and if it becomes healthy, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is not the case, be aware that the corruption is too deep, and you will not be able to remove it; if there is no other means than cold douche in nature; and if you have small corrupted bones, and you try to remove them with forceps, if the instrument is suitable for this, and if there are more, do not leave any; and if moisture opposes you, and it does not cause pain, then cope and moisture and char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	1. If you do not open the wound within an hour, put something on the wound that is slightly moistening, and leave it until the pus has run out of the bones; then if the bones are lighter, and it is only a large bone such as a thigh or knee, if you only let the corruption run so that the blackness is all gone, then restore the wound; and if a large part of the bone is corrupted and comes out of the bone, if it can be sewn and covered with something to stop the corruption, and then treated as much as possible, and I will tell you about a fistula that came out in your leg, so that you can take it as an example and help in your practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The young man was thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from an cause that came from the chest, so much that the materials came to the leg, and he fell into a large abscess, and there was no reason to open; but the women overpowered it so much that the abscess burst, and corroded with matters, and became a fistula, and many wounds of belly and cold chest came out; and they treated him for two years, and there was no knowledge in the art of hands, as soon as I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines used on it, and what corroded from the wounds of the cold chest; and his chest became red with his youth, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I sewed a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some came together at another part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I thought thus, and pushed into the hole as far as I could see a part of the bone, and found it rotten and perished, and the corruption was right up to the bone's end; I knew that what I saw was rotten bone, and I wanted to make sure there was no more corruption, so I began to restore the wound with ointments for a long time, but I could not suture; then I opened it again, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I treated it, and then I closed the wound, but I could not glue the flesh because it was all rotten, so I restored it with ointments; it became healthy and healed quickly, and I did not want to repeat the operation for the fear of the patient's suffering, which he could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For because of the frequent evacuation of blood, but it was completely healthy, and a hard char was found on the bone, and it was in good position and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither in the limb nor in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in no part of the limb, then it should be set in this way: take the wires, and draw them at the head of the bone which is open, and command that they do not extend above; and put another wire of larger diameter than the first, and lay it on the char that is out of the bone, and tie it at the head, so that you can draw the corrupted char away from the limb, and cut the char off where you see it set, that it may not crush the char; and put a bandage or a table on the bone to cover the corrupted char; and set as many times as you can see and feel the corruption, and set again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in a large or small part, if you manage to cut through the bone all at once; then remove the instrument, and then cut through one part of the corruption to another, and the corrosion that is longest from the corruption to the pores, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, if the corrupted joint is closed, and the bone or it contains another part; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the other joints, if there is no other ankle than one that is very tight; and if the corruption is on the hand or foot, if it is very painful at that place, but it is necessary to inquire about the corrosion as it opens, even if the bone or the flesh does not obey you; and you should cut through all the bones in the way you want, but the bone or the flesh will not oppose you; and you should be careful that the incision and the wounds cover these bones according to the seat of the bones and the appearance of the joints, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their length and their width, and their hardness; and for this it is necessary to adjust the instrument to each appearance of the bone; and you should be sure that the work will show the instrument that you have made, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; if the instrument that you have made does not correspond to what is necessary.
dou feu	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	1. If the joint dislocates when you move it, if you cauterize the skin quickly or put on restraining powders, then return to your medicine as soon as it is completed, then tie the wounded member with a firm ligature and treat it until it is healthy; and I will tell you what happened to me in my youth: I found a blackness that seemed to be on fire, and this corrosion came first in his left hand, completely burning it; when he felt the corrosion, if he could not stop the pain, it became healthy; later, when the corrosion or part of the hand returned to me, I treated it with these things after the dissection of the body, and I could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I cut off his hand, but I did not want to hope for a cure; and I doubted that if I cut off my hand, it would not die, because the strength of my hand was weak; and he despairing returned to his home, and wrapped his hand with something to stop the pain, and it became healthy; and I had no other way to learn this but because they have skill in other things.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	1. No time comes with inflammation in the shoulder joint, and it lasts as long as there is a great gathering of bones; then it pierces and perforates, and in a jump, the bones are dislodged, and the wound appears like that of a vase; and the skin that is covered is as fine as silk, and does not touch the bone, nor the nerve, and such a disease if called "health" is not called "fistula," but if it is very long, it reaches the bone, then it is called "fistula"; and if the skin is completely covered, and at the same time it is as fine as silk, like a vase; and if it corrupts, it does not matter whether it is completely covered or not.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	1. If the patient has a fiancé whose hair is falling out and the baldness is not severe, and the face is fair and the eyes are small, then the patient should be treated with Egyptian medicine that is made with mustard, oil, and lavender, which is placed in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey. Then, according to the patient's needs, it is applied in an infusion of honey and wine, and the cyst is treated, and the wound is dressed, and the inflamed part is dried with a cloth, and if the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent, or if the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is small and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation, then the patient should be treated with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of purifying and cleaning, and the wine should be allowed to evaporate and leave a clean scent. If the wound is large and the patient cannot bear the heat of the candle, or if the medicine does not relieve the inflammation
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the belly is in its place, if it does not knot char; and if you do not cover the skin of the wound as you see fit, if it appears in such a way that the belly moves downwards towards the lowest part of the body where it is, because when the belly is in its place, if it does not knot char and if you do not cover the skin of the wound as you see fit, if it appears in part like this: that the belly moves lightly along the belt, and does not leave any part of the belly; and take consolidating medicines to put out the pain of the patient, and they are placed on the draped cloth that covers all the patient's body; then cover as strongly as you can at the place of the wound that is larger than the other, because they are soaked with blood in the other part of the belly according to the quantity of blood, and put them there at the wound of the sick person to align the belly, and do not leave the great draping until after one more time; and the one who is at the wound of the sick person's belly often wants to align the belly, and he checks what comes from the belly, whether it is poison or little or much, or digested or indigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or fever, and if it has happened aposteme or not, and when your medicine has extended itself and you see the nature that jumps at the wound of the sick person's belly, if it checks whether the breasts have already swollen, and approaches the plague; and then leave the morning or the evening, and when you dress the wound, if it changes the other draping, and renew the soaking.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	When the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the nipples have not hardened yet.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	When the venom is subtle and short after a long journey, if you do not despair of your health, it means that your health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	When the wounds are slow and short after a long journey, if you do not despair of your health, it means that your health is approaching. If the nipples have not hardened yet, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts become wet and indigestible after a long journey, it is a sign that the health is approaching. If the wounds are slow and cause pain, and the breasts
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Gangrene is an abscess that arises from the finger, either the little finger of the hand, or the thumb, or by chance in other two; and when it becomes infected, and is not cared for, if it comes to gangrene, it spreads and grows, until it reaches the root of the finger, and in some cases it reaches all the way; and it comes to corrosions around the bone, until there is painful pressure, and the head is large, and the color is black.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut off all the excess that has been made from the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The fire cautery is a great help when the bone is healthy, and the finger is healthy; and if the finger presses on the nail, and it begins to prick, and burn, then you should remove the nail entirely from the finger, and cut it off at the top, and carefully and gently cover the remaining part of the finger with a piece of cloth soaked in hot and corrosive medicines to heal all wounds. Then the cure of wounds when they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, and it comes out, because as much of the bone is corrupted and destroyed, so it cannot heal; and if you see the bone corrupted, and cut it off as said before, then cure it when it is healthy; and if it is hard, and bind it with a bandage, and it feels great pain, then it should be healed as soon as possible; and if it is very hard, and cut it across the nail, and make sure that the cut does not reach the finger which is on the nail, because the patient will feel too much pain; and if this happens, then put something on it to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the broken hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The broken hand is common among some men by chance, and it often happens that they die, and never recover, and no one is born in the root of the joint, or the birth is not from us of two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who do not break any bone and are still alive, and those who break a bone at the joint, often stop; the size of the one who is broken is usually lighter, in the same way: size it from its root like a wide sawn timber.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who break at the root of the joint are difficult to heal: if you have much pain.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the case where the head is dislocated from the shoulder, if you are able to first reduce the dislocation back into place, then cover the bone with a suitable cloth, and then treat it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The symptoms that come to us usually come at birth, or from wounds, or from burns, or from other things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you cover the wound with a cloth, if it needs to be treated according to its natural forms; then put between two sheets or oiled velvet, so that it does not slip; or put between two pieces of silk as long as it is inflamed, if it comes to that.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When the patient touches either of his hands with his thumb, if it is not too hot, then so be it.
des vils	of evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Their bodies are swollen with unhealthy fullness, filled with melancholic superfluities, that come to more and more members of their limbs; and the more there are in their legs of those who go to prayer and work and bear, the more there are.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must never give him any purging of colic, and then the proper of the basilicon.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is done in two ways: one is on the part where it is painful, and you take out the dark blood; and the other way is that you tie the vein, and pull it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The first sentence to translate is: "The size of the wound is according to this manner: first, cut the hot leg with a sharp knife until it is not subtle, then tighten the leg with the help of the hands of the masseur, pressing on the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one, two, or three places, of a large size, then ease and tie off the black blood with your hand, from one to the other, as much as you can without causing too much pain to the patient's strength; then close it, and command that it be sewn with black threads; and continue the evacuation and cleaning of the wounds as the veins become smooth, and leave it to the masseur.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. When the leg of the patient is cold, if it has hair, then wash it with warm water, and dry the leg with a cloth until it turns red, and heat the foot; and if there is no fire, then heat the foot with fire, and then place it on the cold part of the knee or below the ankle; then apply leather to the toe, and burn the leg from all sides, until it turns red and black, and when it becomes black and white, as if it were a blunted thread; then cut the leather off, as soon as it is dry, and then place it on the other thigh, and three times; then burn the leather along the leg until it turns red, and then smooth it with the heel, as you have done, and place it on another thigh, if you have more, and then smooth it, and place it at the second point; then take it out of the tailor's tailor, as soon as it is all done, and the tailor; and if you do not take it out of the tailor's tailor, and raise it, if it bites a double thread, and cut it and pull it, and cut the tailor's tailor, and turn your hand in both directions, until it is; and keep it from being cut, for if it is cut, if you cannot touch or lift it, and it comes near to the patient; and when you have treated it, put a poultice of fine linen moistened with wine and rose oil on the wound; and cure it as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	When the vis (or limb) is contracted, twisted, and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if you must cut it painfully, but do not cut it completely; and the traction (or pulling) is as we have mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron that is used to cut the limb if it is twisted, and does not cut too deeply, so as not to cut the vein; and it is a thick gouge, because if it were too fine, it would cut the vein, but if it is thick, as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the vein of the arm.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is infected in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it may occur in other parts than in the legs, and this is caused by flesh that comes out of the hide, just as it does from the tail of a snake and turns, infecting between the hide and the char.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then it changes its color, and begins to bleed, just as a root of a plant does.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. The shoulder is infected in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it may occur in other parts than in the legs, and this is caused by flesh that comes out of the hide, just as it does from the tail of a snake and turns, infecting between the hide and the char. If the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then it changes its color, and begins to bleed, just as a root of a plant does. If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then it changes its color, and begins to bleed, just as a root of a plant does. If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	1. And no time at this vein hands rain, and moreover when it opens in the joint of either shoulder or both, and then comes out with pustules, and which jumps rain; cure the latter as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	2. Those that are born between leather and horn.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	3. This disease is called in our land "disease of beef," because it often occurs in cattle, and is a small worm that goes up and down between leather and horn, and passes through all the limbs from head to toe, and causes great pain in the limbs as it goes up and down, and sometimes it goes to the belly; and it is caused by the humors of some animals, such as serpents, snakes, and ascarides or worms in the belly; and one doubts its malice, because when it goes through the limbs, it goes up to the head, and sometimes it returns, and destroys the brain. And this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the wound healing and drying, if it can only be that when he will: if it comes to pass that you examine the leg and find it well-closed, then close it and cut it off, and put it in a vessel of hot water, and do not touch it if it is cauterized with fire as long as it lives; and the greatest harm it can do, if it is that it touches oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or going near the oil, if the corners of the mouth are formed, then close it, and cut it off; and it is necessary to use the cauterant with disinfection of solutions of medicines for the humors of the body, and avoid eating spicy foods as nourishment.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from the pain that comes from wind
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "winding" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in certain parts of the body, and spreads from one part to another; and I see what I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called a female patient, and I saw my arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of my shoulder; and later, I saw it rise as quickly as any thing, as if it were living silver when it cut through the flesh of my shoulder; the pain left that part, and spread to the shoulder, and then a little while later spread throughout the body, until it came to the other shoulder; then she told me that it turned inside out across the body, as I see.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I am surprised to see how it moves from limb to limb, as I have never wanted this disease to happen in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Indeed, I wanted to make sure that the pain was not transferred from one limb to another, but I did not want it, as I see it in the woman; and I thought it was because the woman had dry breasts, and the veins were exposed, and because this constraint appeared; and I did not know if it was for this reason in those who are delicate, and who have dry breasts and veins replenished.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	When you see the patient being cured of this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, if the limb is not quickly reduced, and then hold it until the constraint is released at the joint; and cauterize the joint; and if you do not see this with your own eyes, if the cure of this which relieves the constraint, if like pills of sinew, and pills of hemp, and similar things.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows come in various types, according to their appearances and according to the wounds they cause in the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of arrows is such that some have long points, and short, and sharp, and blunt; and some have angles, and some have curves, and some have pieces; and one that pierces any member in different ways: either in the principle members like hair, skin, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, uterus, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When the pain becomes unbearable in any of these limbs, and the sign of death appears, which I will tell you later, you perceive: if you intend to remove this arrow, for death follows in its wake; and when this sign does not appear, and the wound is not deep, then cut it out and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of great pain appears when the arrow pierces the bone and causes the eye to jump, which is the one that was suspended by the eye socket, and it is characterized by scotomie and sode and esvertin and roujor of the limbs, and inflammation and roujor of the tongue, and spasme and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of cole; and by chance it is not caused by the nose or ears; and by chance it affects the speech and voice; and a sudden jump of the white wound-like pus resembling poppets, and in that jump as well as a cough like that of a horse; and if this sign appears, if you hold on to the treatment, and remove the arrow if it is not deep.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the shoulder when it is pressed or cut is that it hurts or feels hard as if it were stuck in something solid; and by chance the shoulder becomes motionless like the leg, and in a short time black blood comes out, and there is cold sweat and cold frost, and the patient feels doubt that the death is near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the eye that is not opening is that there are no signs of swelling from the wound, and the gum is inflamed, and the face turns pale, and he sighs high and cries out in pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the eye is pressed in the covering of the head, it hurts the small ribs; and there is great pain and sighing and trembling; and all the members of the shoulder are moved.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow hits the thigh or stomach by chance, then there is no digestion of the meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow hits the thigh or stomach, and there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and the urine jumps out and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain: these are fatal wounds.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if the face, neck, throat, shoulder, and back are affected, and the limb seems, they are saved according to different conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the bone or artery is in the flesh and it is not moving, as I will tell you if I remember, because you are doing it wrong.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to my home a bone that was cut or broken at the root of the ear: I tried to set it, and from another part I removed the grease from the ear, and it became healthy.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I found a bone that was cut or broken in the grease of the oil of the paper of the ear, and the bone was set, and it could not be reached but to the point of the loud fist, and it was as large as a Turkish bow, all of it light for the ears; the joint was healthy, and I never had any accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And there was a gash in the throat of a creature, and it was the Arabian ear: I was the hair, and subtle as I passed, and it was healthy for the creatures.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And there was a gash in my belly, which I thought would kill me; and then if it did not change its position within 30 days, I would cut out the gash, sew it up, and it would heal, and there would be no further accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if your home has a gash in the back or buttocks, and it was caused by a wound; and the gash did not heal, and did not follow its natural dispositions, and did not find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man, who was pricked by an arrow in his face, and suffered from the wound; and it took a long time to suffer great pain; and of other kinds.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And found an arrow in the shoulder of a prince, the king, who was buried in the neck, and was slightly curved to the right side; and it was completely embedded when I was called for treatment after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound to be very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I examined it with all my subtlety, and I did not feel anything; but I felt a sharp and painful sensation in the right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought that this was the end of the rib I placed the sharp, dry digestive juice on it, because the rib did not burn; and I saw that it was from the rib.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the salve to my hands, and relieved the right side of the wound, and delayed the patient's pain for a long time, until he felt the rib and his limbs; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied the poisonous salve to the wound with my hands, as it was overgrown, and I peeled it off, and I felt the end of the rib that was attached to the limb; then I applied more of the poisonous salve to the wound through the salve, until the head of the rib appeared visibly; and it healed well in four months, and then I removed the stitches and the nails on both sides, and could not; therefore I continued to refine and invent ways to splint, as soon as I had good stitches made with my nails, according to how the form comes at the end of this chapter, as I mend it and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	The patient suspects that the cartilage in the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it accordingly, and the wound was sore, but the pain in the nose was completely relieved.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you about the quality of extracting some arrows, so you should use your judgment, as the books cannot make everything look perfect; but the masters of the craft can do well with a few good things, and with what is present and deficient, they perform nine operations, and use nine instruments, as the things extracted in this art descend.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come from the limbs or they are false if according to two ways: either by the shoulder or they enter, or by another part; and the one that passes through the eye or it enters, is an arrow that has entered in the eyes, and it will never pass again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	If she does not jump now, if she lets it be as the char is burned all over and the issue comes out; and then she gets stuck in the bone, and she cannot move if she leaves any joints, and each joint; and therefore she jumps, and if she does not jump, if she perceives through the entire body subtly, as long as the char is burned all over and the issue comes out, and then she turns.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the shoulder, and it goes into one of the bellies of the head, or some of the accidents I have told the midwife: if she does not remove it, but lets it be as long as it is even after some joints, because if she removes it it comes out to bleed, it is the death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the dislocation is not evident except in the bone alone, and does not cause any sudden pain, and the patient has no other previous injuries, then it is not a cause for concern.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is not evident and cannot be corrected, then it should be treated as soon as possible, as I have told you; then treat the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the dislocation is not visible in the limb alone, and cannot be seen, and the patient insists on trying to correct it; and if you feel it, and there is no suitable instrument available; and if you do not want to cause further pain or damage to the wound, and the joint is swollen but there are no nerves involved, and the dislocation is not too far, and you treat the limb as much as possible, and if the ears of the limb are held in place, and you break or twist them gently, until you can treat them; and carefully, even if you break the joint, you should treat it more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you do not press once, if the bone is still in place until it is read, then pull, because the extraction is difficult.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the dislocation moves against the will, if you ignore what we have said in this chapter; and you are warned of the incision on the nerve and vein, and put in the position you want to remove the arrow, either firmly or gently, or closed or elemental; and you put the bandage according to the shape it was when the arrow came out, because it is the greatest help that can be given, and if you do not, if you put it according to what they show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The first line of the text translates to: "The arrowhead that comes from another part, or it opens nothing of his, or the hide is curled in some place where one can see or feel differently: then pull it out, as much as the barbs can hold, and then extract: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if the arrowhead is held in the bone, if your hand turns around it as you enter the bone, then widen the bone and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be drawn out, if you leave it alone, and then resume the extraction as it is drawn out; and if it is an arrowhead that has been drawn out, and you see blood coming from it, if the head of the arrowpoint enters the hair of the instrument; then draw it out, and if the arrowpoint is hair, draw it out at the end entering the instrument to lighten the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrowhead is lodged, then you must remove the entire shaft or the poison if you can, and then treat the wound as best as you can.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the arrowhead is embedded in the shoulder, belly, or abdomen, and it has prolapsed, and you pull it out, if it comes out; then pull out the vein and nerve, and then extract the arrowhead, and then clean the wound as best as you can; and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the spikes used to treat the arrows resembles the beak of a goose, and it looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in various forms: large, small, and medium-sized, according to the amount of the shaft.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form of the pointed nail is similar to that of a sparrow's wing, by being inserted at the tip of the shaft, as shown in this figure.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The forms of the nails for driving and pulling are similar to this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	of veins that are safe to open are XXXI, of which the head is XVI, which means: the two arteries that are after the ears, which are called the "herb" arteries; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and the vein that is in the front of the head, which is called the "aspirers"; and the vein that is emerged from the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the glands that are on the collar; and the veins that are in the lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	1. The arteries that are commonly found in each arm are usually five: one is the temporal, and it is located on the left side of the costal groove, and is called the "temple vein"; and the other is the subclavian, and is called the "fasten"; it is composed of the temporal and the basilic, and is called the "basilic vein"; and the basilic is located on the right side of the costal groove, and is called the "abdominal vein"; and the abdominal is located on the left side of the costal groove, and is called the "inguinal vein", and is located under the fascia, and is the one that is found, which opens clearly into the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The saved vein is the one located between the ear and the anus, and if it rains; and in the leg, there are three veins: one is the small vein located behind the pocket of the left costal side, and the second one is the vein called "sepsis," which is located at the ankle of the other costal side; and the vein called "birth" (or "nesse"), which is located in the ankle of the other leg's costal side.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The salvation of the veins located behind the ears helps in childbirth and emigration; and the quality of the salvation, as I said, is that you return to the physician's mouth, and rub the leg where the veins are of a rough cloth; then the physician's collar becomes strained until the veins open at the ears in the dependent part of the cheek: then take the lancet, and cut through the vein just before the bone, then hold your hand firmly on all the veins as you pass, and cut and sew the cloth and the veins as many times as necessary until you see; then tie it and lie down, as long as it is not safe; and I have already said about the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The head of the second arteries that are in the second temples, if they are old, diseased, and accustomed to it, and have wetness in the eyes; and if you consider it as I say: and that the patient draws his collar tightly when the veins are open; and it feels cold to your thumb, and then swells; then loosen the knot at the top of the vein on your thumb index, and cut the lancet off, and loosen the vein at the top, and the cloth, as you have done in the other veins, and make sure to draw out the lancet according to your need; then remove the patient's hand from the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then let it form, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about their comfort and extraction, or beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The first line translates to: "The health of the vein at the front of the face is as good as the health of the cranial vein in ancient facial diseases, migraines, and bruises; and it is distinguished if the patient draws in his neck while twisting, as the eye appears; then take the instrument called 'cautery', which is shaped like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and firmly hold it with your hand or another object, and let out the blood according to the amount you see; then tell the patient to relax his neck, and keep the eye until it is healthy and never once use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	1. All that is needed is for the flames to be too close; and it is safe to cross, because the bone is near, and by chance the flames break when they are being tended to.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	2. The safety of the two veins that are in the armor is helpful for the wounds, and the knot, and the bruise, and the pain in the face, and the diseases of the face; and the quality of its safety if it is that the patient draws his neck back twisting any limb, as before; then safe, and so the safety of traversing a little long a little flame wide, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance very fierce; then make sure to take enough blood, as much as you can, and then press on the wound, and it will heal well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And if the washing of the vein is not done properly, and it is too cold, and it causes diseases of the face, as well as rashes that come into the face, and even when it is old; and the quality of the washing is such that the herbs stretch out their collars, then press the vein with your left hand, and take a subtle flame and light it on the eyelid that is between the two eyes, because the vein does not open well, and now it will start to bleed; and do not push too hard, and take blood according to your need, then lie down for a night, because it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The patient's health is aided by the application of the cauterizing iron to the wounds at the beginning of surgery and for various diseases such as gout, empyema, corrosion, herpes, and stings; and the quality of the cauterizing iron is estimated if the patient is able to tighten his collarbone on both sides as we have stated; and the master should be present at the head of the patient, and the patient should be placed at a distance widely enough for the surgeon to work freely, without interference from the patient; then another part is treated on the other limb, and the wound is dressed and tightened so that the patient does not strain it; and it is left for the morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the deer
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the lips of the deer helps to close in the mouth, and to prevent the corrosion of the gums, and the cracks in the lips, and the wounds and the pain.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the patient stand before you, and tighten his collar as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the teeth, of which one is on the left side and the other on the right, and they are dark because of their black color and their thin black gums: therefore, take one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then take the largest of each pair, and all of them, because it is a similar manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the healthy side of the tongue.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	If the healthy side of the tongue is on the side of the throat after the head is healed, and it's at the chin, and there are diseases of the eyes, and diseases of the mouth; and if you can determine which is healthier, if the patient has a black vein in front of your hands before the sun, and feel the tongue, and look at both sides of the throat, then they are healthy on both sides, and do not worry too much, for these are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The usual costly veins that are healthy are found in two ways: either by pressing on the entire flame with a wide finger, or by using a thin olive oil as you would when shaving, and they are called "anesil"; and they are wide and thin according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the fire cautery is such that it is named after the flame, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is suitable for opening the veins that are thick with large clots of blood, and contain large clots and turmoil; and this is the form of the fire cautery:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtle in its application, and it is safer for the veins that are thin, or there is thin blood in them:
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The health of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are deosy in the throat, and the collar, and the chest, and the belly; and it is necessary for the physician to make sure it is healthy, and to avoid the artery that is deosy:
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it pricks the artery, and blood comes out, then it should be held steady if it can be, as I have said; and it should not be pinched by fire, but cut if it can be, as I have said.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the boil does not open clearly, then it should be held steady if it can be, and another one should be changed; or you do not want any rain on it, or you want to open the vein with the arm: it will open clearly; and the cautery is applied hot, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the vein swelling, and it does not open if you hold the arm steady, and touch the vein as far as you can reach; then sign the vein with your thumb, and then release the arm, and cut the vein with the hot cautery; and be careful not to hurt the artery when you see the vein bulging, because it is the artery: do not cut.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you see coming out from above as the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, signifying that there is no artery: haste to you, and put your hand far away, then observe your hand when it is free of pain, which many times occurs; hold your arm, let it be, and do not move the patient's joints; and so be cautious, and do not move until it is healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it is not inflamed, and it hurts, and the physician is not present, then if the artery is open, as it may happen, due to the return of the head; treat it.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a scalpel of fistula, and make it, and take one of the halves and tie it well to the other; if it is not stained, it is well; if not, then the cure, as we have said, with powders that stain blood; and the stains are not much in other positions for the small wound of the wound, and the power of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The health of the vein in the environment if it helps that it treats the wound with blood from the head and chest, because it is composed of basilic and cranial, as we have said; and it is necessary for the physician to relax the nerve that is wounded, and if it does not too much in a short time, and it relaxes the nerve, and it grows and the health is grown, and by chance it cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open any holes for its subtlety, then it is necessary that you heal the instrument first; and hide the nerve from your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is blood between the two veins, if they are long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment of the head is beneficial, if it attracts blood to the chief, and helps the wounds; and it is more helpful in pricking with olive oil or with mercury, because it is the most safe of all wounds, because it does not harm the nerve or the artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Indeed, it is better to use a lighter force, and do not hurt anyone the first time, and continue; and by chance, the legs may be affected in some men, but it does not hurt anyone the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about health is that it is not just about being healthy, but also about maintaining good health and avoiding diseases. It is made in one of the three veins: head, fast, and basilic; and it should be done at the beginning of prayers, and in turn and in yvet after menstruating, when the sign of fullness appears; and it should be done on the first or third day, after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The health that is amenistree with diseases has no fixed determination, but rather when the belly is full or empty, in all hours and in every ten; and it is not necessary to make sainie for children under 14 years old, nor for women who are only carrying a quarter of a month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They should not neglect the slight illness that has passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone appears to be healthier, in whatever way that may be, if it is possible to deflate the intestines of a light cyst, if there are fibers retained, then the vaginas do not contain harmful superfluous intestines as members; and neither should one be unhealthy due to too much meat or wine, either fat or lean; and if one is sick after a colic attack, vomiting, and diarrhea, and many women are pregnant, and many are menstruating, and many are nursing, and many are sleeping and waking up, and all the virtue, or by something of the arm or the chest; then subtly the humors, if it is not too large, by meat and drink and medicines, you can do this; then take a bath, nothing harms you, to subdue the sickness, and to make the voice healthier, and to cleanse the vagina, as we have said; and keep away from work, pleasure, luxury, and such things; and be sober and joyful, and be healthier than one is now, and rub your arm twice or three times, then draw the line tight, because if it is too tight or small, you cannot take it without; and then rub your hands with oil as much as the vagina burns, and feel it on; then make your healthers flame with a little oil, and put your right hand on the vagina where the cyst was, and press it with a little oil, so that the vagina does not hurt when you insert the member.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that run like cords to the healer, and if they are many, as those of ventsosity, then when one puts the flame on it, if it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and then it is one of these; and if the healer advises to release the vein, then it is the wound too tight, for then it comes to this that the healer must be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is released for the first time, it is good; but if not, then it continues a little less of that joint or quickly, and if it is not straightened, it is deformed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	When it is seen that the patient is shortened and the shoulder is drawn back, and it is left for one or two days, and does not tie the arm: by chance, blisters come; do not enter the bath, then resume the healing as it pleases; and if the wound is small, or the flesh is subtle and you doubt that there are many sands, just as you see, so in this wound itself, all fairly; and the work is done in a hurry, otherwise, if the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the shoulder shorten, if you do not resume the healing, and put a little oil on it, because it softens the chest of the pain, and kills the oiled part in this shoulder that lies on the oil; and after each healing, when you heal the wounds, to fortify the course of the pain, and this itself makes a fist and bends at the elbow when it is too thick. If subtly it does not lie and spreads when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	When large abscesses come, which come many times, if it is not healthy only once when the vein opening is small, if you hurry, and put a wet sponge on the shoulder, and wrap it with a cloth, and hold it for an hour; and it should be done after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if there is no black or greenish discharge at the shoulder after any days, if you do not know; and if you see, put no aloe or remedy recovered in the juice of ale, mustard, or semblance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	1. And many times there is infection and appearance at the health of the basilica: then place your hand there, and if you find the leg too tight in the compression of your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. Do not place anything on it that we have said, for by chance without the artery; but I have applied it dry to strengthen the leg, then another care, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	3. And take each sinus according to its quantity and color of the sinus.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	4. For if it is black when it comes out, let it be red as long as it is pink; and if you see it large, let it be small as long as it is subtle; and if it is too cold, let it be cooled.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	1. It is necessary for the one who is in pain and far along, and has skill in extracting poison, to make a larger wound, and it should be wide flaps; and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it will be safer and often healthier, and it should be cut across, not pinched; and this way of healing is saved from the spread of poison and nerve pain, and it is worth noting that the healed wound is not wide but long.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	1. And for the one whose heart needs healing, it is necessary to give milk of ripe pomegranates; if it is feverish, three times or four times as much sanc; and if it has a cold complexion, before the healing milk of ripe pomegranates, or in a sip of honey syrup with aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chives, and well-scented honey.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If the patient feels unwell after the evacuation of blood, if it is humid and smells like charcoal, and if other things are used as we have said in the division or chapter of sincope for the removal of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If the patient sees his arm swelling and becoming worse, if it happens, when he is overwhelmed by great health, that he gains a little health each time, according to the amount of his virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If the patient sees his arm swelling after the first health and he feels strong, that he gains seven hours of health after the first health, or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one appears to be healthier from another part, then it should be healthier the next day or the following.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has blood from the corpse that has already been washed, and brings on fever; if it comes to draw large amounts, and open the wound as much as it can, then that you reward all the conditions of health, and put your hand on the pimple when it is healthy, so that the death does not come in the pimple, and this happens many times when the healthier ones are neglected; and it will not happen if you see the arm sweat, and make it bleed again, and the wound is closed, then you press on it; but if it is frozen, then let the arm hang down as far as it can, without touching the point of the flame, until the cold that has been brought to the vein is gone, and puts back the pimple in its place, and lightly presses on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, if it is left without being stretched and not tightened, as long as the abscess is pacified.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw the blood twice, if the vein is in the same arm or in another arm, or in the other hand.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy because it is composed of the vein in the shoulder.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of the healthy one if it is that the patient's hand becomes hot and red; then it should be tied loosely, if the vein appears well, then the blood now flows through it, not too wide or too long; and the wounds are large, and they are well placed near the joint of the hand, and if they cannot be closed, then the hand is put in hot water, and the blood is allowed to flow in the hot water until you have enough; and if this is the case, then do not tie the hand in hot water, because it is more likely to cause inflammation than in this way; and the vein of this arm is safer than all other veins, because it has not been harmed or damaged.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The first sentence to translate: "The patient of the salve for the left hand is worth all diseases of the stomach, and this is how it is done: tightly wrap the hand, and heat with hot water, as long as the wound is not closed, if you can; and if you see that the hand is not cold all over, then do not apply too much heat, for the flesh is bare and sensitive to cold, and then put the hand in warm water, if it does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be opened.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated as much blood as your skill allows, if you put on the vein oil and seal with a pin, and then make a channel for each rain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The patient's hand is affected by the disease of the mouse, and I do everything as I have said to the left.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The health of the soul is affected by all diseases that are caused by the heart, such as diseases of the liver, retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and diseases of the arms and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of his health is that the patient has fever and sweat on the vein as it grows, and he presses on the joint of the wound; and the vein if it is at the ankle, and through the wound in the foot, and the rain goes out of the ankle, or to the foot, which is more wide.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	If you are healthy and the wound is clean, and the skin is intact, and the dislocation is traumatic, then it should be treated as follows: and cut the flaps.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If you cannot remove it, then set the wound in a splint and let it heal well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	If the wound becomes infected, the second time it may recur in a small area because the lesion is salty; do not doubt nerve, as we have said, and then make an ointment of the other part appropriately.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The lesion on the sciatic nerve is at the ankle, and its healing depends on the pain in the thigh, when it is due to a gout.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its health if it is that the patient enters or bathes, and draws in the ankle IV times while twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then the healthy in all ways that you can, and crossing; and it is wise to cover it, for the wound is raw and it is mout reponue a mains homes.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not cover it, then the healthy no rain of the wound that opens or does not pass through the little toe, and towards the small dog; and make as much blood as you see, and then release the lien, and put on coton and tighten; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	The first sentence to translate is "des sainies de ventouse". The
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventouses are made of horn, or iron, or silver; and ventosation is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting without drawing blood.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventosation which is by cutting is done in two ways: either it is all fire, or hot; and ventosation which is made by cutting and drawing blood is made in twelve degrees of the cor, of which one is the chief; and the others are in the col; and the others in the costeis dou col; and the ventosation of the menton; and the ventosation of the II espaules; and the ventosation of the crupies; and the ventosations of the II bras; and the ventosations of the II jambes; and the ventosations of the II chevilles; and the ventosation does not touch any veins, only small vains that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore no one dies from it like a sainie de voinne; and it is only necessary that it be maintained, neither hot nor cold, in no disease that comes from repletion, as long as the cor is dry.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	1. If necessary due to illness, or for habit, if the physician sees each patient at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and also in every ten days; for there are those who, when they have to ventilate, weigh heavily; and if such as have fullness and bleeding in their face, and in their cheeks, and at the collar, and are pale; and those who have a chill in their stomach, and lose their tongue, and spit out blood; and if there are those who sneeze, and see cold and fever and death, and such things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	When we see these signs, and even when it is three hours after the month, we command our patients to rest for an hour.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The salve of the head helps to alleviate the pain; what comes out are the hairs, and it is only after all the blood has been evacuated; this resting is for the relief of the patient's headache, and it is only for those who have a cold complexion or have fevered themselves, as this does great harm; therefore, it is only the watchman and those who have cold diseases should use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal well, if they become oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to put the ventouse in a place further away due to the fear of obedience.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventouse in the neck is in the lower part of the shoulder and the head, and therefore it is useful in reducing pain, and cutting off the nose, and for all, and for repletion; and it should be placed as far away as possible, because if it is too tightly held, it can cause obedience or stomach and intestines.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventouse in the neck is useful for the costals of the collar, and it alleviates and relieves, and reduces and strangles, and for the pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the lower part of the shoulder; and it is necessary that you command the patient to express his hand when putting it on, so as not to cut the artery, and to prevent the dislocation from recurring.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Dislocations are caused by no joint of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	Dislocations are caused by no joint of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The first line of the text is translated as: "If the leg ventouses are healthy, it is because they open widely, attracting blood from the entire body, and alleviate old pains from rains, labor, and prostate, and stimulate the flow of blood. They are in the legs of the II sophenes and II chevilles, and all of them weaken the body after long use, and cause headaches in various positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The second line of the text is translated as: "If you are putting in the ventouse first, and then again, and move it gently, and continue doing this until you see the red and swollen leu, and the pain subsides, then stop, and reset the ventouses, and take care in the position of the body, because there are those who have such pain and large wounds: if you only injure once, and make wide wounds, and a few are healed; and gently rub.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	If the patient is thin, then it may be injured twice: the first time by subtly cutting the vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If the patient is very thin, then it may be injured three times: the first time by subtly cutting the vein, and the second time by accidentally cutting it again. However, if we only touch it once, we will not cause any further harm.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	If we remove too much blood, we often return to it; and if the patient is very thin, then it may be injured frequently, and if we cut it deeply, and it is noticed, and those who have thick skin and are firm, that you apply ointments of opening and dissolving essential oils to the wounds: if this is the case, use olive oil, or orange blossom oil, or sunflower seed oil; and if it is silver, use sage oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, then take olive oil, or balsam, or oil of anise, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the part to be cleaned is soft and large pores, it is not necessary to put oil on it, but it is recommended to wash it after the extraction of rose water, or cold water, or mushroom water, or violet water, or porcelain water, or any similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And the one who has moisture on his lips, if he raises his saliva, or rose water, and mint water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those who have excessive superfluity rise from wine vile, or from ague of depression, or from decoction of anet or chamomile, or from other similar causes; and they are not healthier before bathing than after, but rather an hour or two after bathing; and they do not sleep before ventilation, and they must wake and stay awake when they need to ventilate and when they are ventilating.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	If those who are in health are cold and too much and inflamed, it happens that they crave cold things, such as green apples and endives and leafy greens, and similar things; and they drink punches, and char of cheese, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	1. Those who have a cold complexion, if they pregnant honey, and sweet wine odorous, which is between viel and noveil, and drink little, and drink pucins and small oiselz and pigeons; and the hour that it will be wet, if it must more drink than mengier; and it is necessary to give to some men once triaicle or muscate before ventosacion, or after, for to comfort the principal members; and it should be subtle the without, but it only those who are chaut the boivent.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	1. The wounds that are made to hurt are those that are made on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the stomach and the bowels and the bladder and the urethra, for this member does not suffer much hurt outside, and only causes pain when it attracts pain from one part to another, as we do with the mammaries when they are not sick; to overcome viscosity that is in the member, as we make wounds on the stomach and the bowels to sweeten the member; and to relieve pain when it has opulation or incision, if it attracts opulation or incision by chance, or if the incision lacks flesh from its lobe; and it is made empty when it is placed on the liver and the spleen when it has viscosity retained, and these wounds are administered dry to suck them only; and never are they administered together with fire, and never with hot aqua tede, as in diseases that cause much weeping, and in this way we fill the wound with hot water or with herbs cooked in it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the vacuum administered by fire is:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	The form of the vacuum administered by fire is: two palm-wide and half a thumb's width, with a small pertus at each end, like a needle, and it is made of iron or silver, so that it does not cut the patient's skin when inserted into the member; and in the middle, there is a groove of iron or silver to hold a catheter, and they are either large or small according to the disease and age of those who take them, because the vacuums of children are different from those of adults, and the thin ones are different from the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	1. And it must be placed on the dressing over the member: take the candle or liniment, and put it in the opening of the thread that is in the opening of the thread, so that it is clear at the end of the opening that it does not burn the patient; then place it on the member, and you must be as we have said, if you see that it rises, and if it vaporizes, and then take the liniment as before, and reapply often, if you can.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	1. In the dressing that is in the patient who is sick with catarrh, without any wound or opening, and is not sick except when it is clear with a runny nose, and is placed over the member only when it is, and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	1. Withouts are not stolen except in members where it is not possible to put a ventouse due to their small size, such as the lips and genitals, and similar parts; and in these parts, desnuez of char is done if it is not too long or thin, and other similar things. And when you see withouts that are in soft waters with a nice sensation, take them and put them in a soft water bag as much as they are family-like, and have nothing in the belly; then make the member healthy and clean, and then clean the wound, and put on the withouts when they are red, and then put them on, as long as they are flat and not paining, whether it is the left or right one, if it can be put on with a ventouse, then put it on, for this is after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then raise the leg of the patient, and then the arm; and if the patient is too tired after the operation, then take cold linen and wet it, and wrap around, as long as the limb is not swollen; and if the limb is swollen, then take cold linen or vinegar, or similar things, as long as it is swollen; or take half of the patient's feet that have been pared, and leave them on the foot as long as they are burning, if it becomes firm now; and if you have more experience, then take more pieces of wood.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not take on the salve, if you froize the lew of clean water, or you use a needle as much as it needs, and then put them in, and as they feel the clean water, if they heat; and when you see that they are closing, if you put a pinch of aloe and silk or wool, or charcoal, if they close now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	I advise you, my dear friend, that the matter of this chapter will not seem strange to anyone who has read the former books, and who has not; and for this reason, the science has been lost in our land, because I have never found any book on the subject; and I do not know if there is any, except perhaps by the science of the old books, or by my own study and treatment of the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the fractures that have been produced, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say at the beginning of this book the words and chapters or the sage puts his understanding, and moreover, so as to prove it, if those who have experienced it believe and learn this noble art, and they teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or twisting occurs to no one, if it comes to pass that you have stronger pain on one side than the other, as weak as a horse's neck, or as fragile as a child's arm; or if you hold it and it is not very tense, or too loose; and if you have cold hands, it means cold juices, and chilled hair, and do not drink cold drinks, nor eat any thin soups, and do not fill your belly with too many meats that fill the veins with blood, as long as you have no doubt of apoplexy or expansion of matter in the member; if the patient's pulse returns to its normal state after using it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that cause large viscosity, or if it is thick like dough, such as wheat, rye, barley, pork, fish, wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the more the patient is fed, the faster the fracture heals.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And you advise that fractures of the bones and decrepitudes cannot be well recovered or healed according to their nature by the help of the limbs, nor those who are too flexible, as with the bones of little children; but if it is necessary, first reset the large tendons that have been torn and joined to the member as it was before, and do not delay for long in doing so, and because it is necessary to feed on large quantities of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that fractures come in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the skull is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you all kinds of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes in and another that comes out, like the size of a pen's point to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture at a small notch.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each fracture has its own way and proper instrument in restoration, according to what remembers come into the bone; and it is known that the fracture of the bone is by that which is broken, and open well by defense, and soon by pressure of the hand; and when it is not twisted nor at the tip, and the pain is not great in the shoulder, there is no fracture; but it may have twist, or notch, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you can only manage to move it with your hand, but apply the medicines that will come after, and then gently pull it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And check that the fracture will be in the joint, and the two parts are disjointed, it is now necessary to fix them evenly, unless the wound closes and returns; and if the wound closes and appears, as long as the wound is calmed, then it is left loosely and gently in the place where you can lightly and wisely insert it, and check that the restoration of the part is lighter than the restorations of other bones or pieces; then it is pulled, as it should be done after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	1. And if in the bone of the foot there are pieces broken, if they are two parts, it is hands or fingers, or in your hand some small limbs, or in two cords, or in one cord and in your hand; and place the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are healed, if you reset by your own means the additions in their places in the muscles that you pull, and keep that by your will not cause the surgeon's injury or pain; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	2. And it feels good in your hand if it seems that it is not well: if it curves beautifully, and is not strained too much, do not press as they who come by their own experience know how to do, with the force of contraction and pressure on the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	When the member is in pain, if the patient holds the limb still, neither watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor otherwise, and ensures that the limb is securely held so that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when there is no pain, if it is not yet at the point of dislocation, and it is necessary to set it in its proper position so that there is no pain; and keep it in place until the time comes when you return it to its original state; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I will tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	There are different types of broken bones in small, large, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For if it has bitten the limbs, just like a snake and worm: if it comes with folds of fine linen and subtle ones; and those that are large, like a bowstring or rope: if it comes with a wide and hard cord, for the wide ones entangle all the great member, and draw it evenly, unless it has no knot; then it enters light and loose bands, three times or four according to the size of the member, and holds the hand tightly along the entire member, then goes to the end of the fracture and draws it less than the fracture itself, and softens the member a little at a time until you feel a great part of the healthy flesh, then take another member, turn the end towards the broken part, and then return to the part opposite the fracture, and draw it gently, not too hard or too loosely, as we said in the first case; then put between the entangled lips of linen or wool, as it is even, then tie all with a knot, and then put your well-made ties on if it has no knot or slipped.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	If it is inflamed or infected, apply something soothing to the inflamed area that also relieves the pain and leaves no marks. Then tighten your eyes, and they should be of a width of one and a half fingers or less, or of the size of a knuckle, or of the thickness of a palm leaf, and they should be in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	However, it is necessary that the piece that is placed on the wound be larger and wider than the others; and should also be longer in length according to the size of the member; then tighten the eyes as you did at the first time, then tie a thread around it just like you did in the first time, but do not make it too tight; the more stretched it is, the less it should be; and the thread should be smooth, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be of linen; for if the thread is too thick, as I have seen the works of fools who make their laces with threads of linen, it can cause great errors, because the thread cannot be even if it is too fine, and it only serves to make the eye smaller between each one.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	When the patient is cauterized by the fire, and the hairs are cut long and even, if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the forceps, and the edges are torn, I will tell you the treatment for this afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And it is important not to strain too much on the joints, as all the limbs will be broken in the first place.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to put on the forceps immediately, but rather after V years or VII, or according to your strength of aposteme chaut; and the way of the ancient emplaustres to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and that you take flour that is made in the mills, and knead it with much water, and make this dough, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the emplaustre restoring fracture in other positions, as well as for women and young children, because it is neither too tight nor too loose.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	1. Another way to mend breaks and dislocations and twists: take barley, linen, and unguent of myrrh, Arabian gum, and resin; mercury, VIII grains; and make powder, and mix with wool of urine; if the complexion of the face is hot, use this plaster as it is of good composition, and rests the broken bones firmly, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	1. Another way to mend twists: take resin and mugate, VIIIII grains; mercury, IX grains; arsenic, X grains; and bole, VI grains; cook well, and mix with vinegar or urine of wool, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other methods of dressing joints and bones, and alleviating pain, and reducing swelling, and fractures: take new cloths, and the oil and butter cooked, and put them on the leg.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore health, but they are good for alleviating the pain of inflammation, and properly treating fractures.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Other methods of plaster that restore broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and earth oven leaves, and burn them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Other methods of plaster for restoring bone fractures and reducing inflammation: take fresh leaves of fig, and earth oven leaves, and burn them together, and make a plaster.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	1. Gather the roots of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of violets, and each part; and boil, and strain with wine, and cleanse your limbs with wet or dry coriander or sage, or any other herb, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	1. Another way to make the plaster more effective when the wound is deep and comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	1. Gather the roots of mallow, linseed meal, balm, honey, and salt, and each part; boil, and marinate with wet or sweet vinegar, or wine, according to the choler of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that nothing should be put on the broken bone to restore it, only wax and oil, and nothing more, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems that Galen says that things should be put on the broken bone to restore it, such as dry hot things like mustard and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to show what is good for a wound and pain: take mouse and chew the tail or the tail of an owl, or the hair of a fox, and wrap it around, and the nail, and then make an application and apply it to the limb.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the swelling will disappear after a short while, and take care not to cause pain or discomfort in the patient's joints; if it does not disappear by hand pressure, and pain comes to the joint, or itching, or tenderness, if you hurry and remove it, and cleanse the wound with the plaster now, and gently dampen a cloth, and dip it in cool water, and lift the limb as much as the itching ceases and the pain subsides, then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, gently moisten with cool or rose oil, and tie it with a knot, until you are sure of no aposteme, and allow the inflammation in the limb to subside, and the pain to cease, then resume the application of the plaster gently, and a little emplaustre, and do not strain it too much; and gradually as it becomes healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	When you see that the wound is bleeding, having bruises and pain, and swelling is all over, and you have the skill to plaster and bandage, if it happens again, as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	When you do not see any sign of the wound closing within three days, four days, or seven days, and never more than twenty days, according to what we have seen, as soon as the break opens and approaches the bone, then the restraint is greater than before, and the flesh enlarges, as I have said before; and if you see the wound drying up more than it should, be careful that no diseases come; take the heat of the fire, every time you clean it, and do it once a day, and keep the water in a pot; through this treatment, you will cut off the diseases from the wound, and mend the harm caused by the flesh: this is good, and if it does not heal within a week, and I have nothing else to offer than pain and improper care.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various kinds of wounds
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of wounds, and various forms; for there are wounds made by the impact of the spear, and which pierce the bone completely, as if it were cut with a knife or sword; and therefore this kind of wound is called "piercing" wound.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	The spear pierces the bone through different senses, and this kind of wound is called "absolute" wound; and these are the wounds of these two large or small gashes.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has an impact that is embedded, or a cut or piercing, or a pricking on the edge of the piercing, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a persistent fracture, which approaches the skin that is loose from the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	If there is a healing wound that is as subtle as a hair's breadth and is a small cut, and for this it is called the "capillary fracture"; and if the wound that is made by injury, or by piercing, or by seeming thing, and causes the piece of the bone to enter, and is the same as the hot iron when they heated the burners; if it enters the pierced hole.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And there are more cases of those who have moist bones, just like that of children; and they occur in all these ways of fracture that are lightly broken if like these; and I will speak about this in his language.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let's know all ways of fractures by the removal they have, and the inquiry has tried, and by the corrupted char that is had.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary appearance is known by this that when one has discovered the bone, and one scratches around it, if the dark fracture is open.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the fracture, keep in mind as many accidents can happen to the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of cole, and admission of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and fever, and the eyes itch and redden, and other signs in more dispositions, if it cannot be cured with doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see a sudden accident, and you hope for a quick recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the pain comes first to you, and it is in the rib, then it is necessary to apply oil before the fourteenth day of the mouse, as you should.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	If it is in this way, then if you apply oil before the ninth day of the mouse, and the skin of the bone is not broken, and the accident that we have mentioned comes, it is necessary to stop.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	If the break of the bone comes at the skin that covers the eye, and it is necessary to cut off the broken part: and if you press the nose of the surgeon's hand on the bone in all the ways you can, and on the figure of the wound more than you can, and when the blood comes out to reveal the bone, or the pus pimple, if it helps that it comes, and when the plague is calmed and secured, then fill the wound with oil-softened flax; and let the plague be calmed and secured for as long as the pus pimple is calmed and secured, and then begin to heal the bone, and it is done according to two ways of incision: one way is that you cut at the narrow end, and it is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then he cuts another piece of greater size than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is if you have many different sizes, some are narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of iron; and carved lightly so as not to pierce the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and thick, it comes to pass that you perforate it easily, otherwise you must administer pieces with tareers, and do not make them too large so as not to go beyond the end of the bone, and they must have a margin or a circle that does not let the point go beyond the bone; and you must have more pieces, if each one fits in its socket for the size of the bone, if you have tareers for each test; and this is the form of the three methods of tareers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	1. The quality to perceive the broken bone is that you place your thumb on the bone, and turn it around until you feel that the bone is perceived; then put your thumb on another part a little later, and then do everything around it, then cut as the incisions in the bone that is between the holes, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, whenever you touch the skull with your hand, or any of the splints that you have like needles, pincers; and make sure you do not touch the brain or the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perceived and cut the bone, if the wound that is made in the bone by another instrument resembling an incision covers the whole bone, but it should be more delicate and subtle than the other incision; and if it does not cut any small bones, nor any scales, if the light bones are gently pressed on the splints; then cure the wound with tentes and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of cutting is when it is said that the Gaulish method is better, which is more certain; and the most powerful, and this is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, where the fracture opening is wide, if you will then measure from the center of this incision, and the shape of the lens-shaped hole will be:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut too much, and the part that is taken is in two parts if the cutting is towards the bone; then, with a small hook, if you lightly cover the entire bone, and be careful of the thread that is left behind; if it is close to the bone, for the bone is easily felt, and causes pain.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only cracked, and it has small pieces, then cover it with a soft file (raser subtil) that you have several quantities of, to smooth out each part of the bone according to its size and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you go before with a rough file, and after with a more subtle one, and keep doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In every other hair removal and subtle fracture, it is necessary to adjust according to its address; and this is something that cannot be undone for the one who has studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	1. If the wound is discovered, then it comes to pass that you put on linen bandages according to the size of the wound, and olive oil, and place it over the wound; then take another bandage doubled in two or three, and olive oil and olive oil, and place it over the first bandage; and do this more lightly than you please, so that you do not burn the linen, then apply other linen bands, and do not strain it too much, only as much as the wound allows; and leave it on for one or two days, until the sore is calmed, then remove it, and apply medicines such as raisins, flour, powder of incense, and aristocratic herbs, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and place it over the wound, and apply further medicines without biting; and let the wound be clean, so that you do not leave the ointment or assemble bowels, for if bowels are assembled under the skin, they can cause great harm to the patient; for if something mouth-biting is placed on the wound, it causes great pain to the surgeon.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	If nothing happens unexpectedly to the patient, if no accidents come to the helper, as we have said, then there is doubt in the matter.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blacking does not come from the medicine we have put on, then some virtue has, if you take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and one part of glue, and put it on your face; then the cure is done in the ways of cures that it covers, as long as it is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	It is said that the two parts of the nose are never broken, unless one only, for they are bones; and this is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it becomes healthy.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should cut off your small finger or thumb, and make the break even with the nail of your index finger, and in the pouch as long as it does not resemble its natural figure; and do this lightly, and warn that the patient does not feel pain through your touch.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part of the nail, and cannot be reached by the thumb, then you should put it even with the end of a large ring.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in the second part, then you should repeat the first joint, and if not, after the ninth or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then cut off the tip of the nail with a sharp knife, if the break is in a part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you cut into another part, the wound is; and let the tentacles be as large as they fill the cavities with pus.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And no restorer will say that one must smooth the tentacles in burr, and each year.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It seems to me that this is well, but they must be smoothed in the making of beef flour and milling powder; then leave the tentacle, as long as the bone is firm, and the cartilage is hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And no time do you cut on the neck of tents, and if it is soft and hanging, and holds the breastplate, and blows the salve among; or as you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	When the abscess is incised and the pus comes out during the operation, if you use a piece of cloth or cotton wool dipped in rose oil or in a drop of laundry soap.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess does not come out, if you use ointment made from flour of Sisam and incense powder, mixed with eggs, then cover it with light sponge pieces, and do not sew the wound; and if the wound in the nose is small, and it is torn into small pieces, if the sutures are easy to remove at this time, then cut the suture, and treat the scars as scars, and solder them with lead, if they are suitable for this; and if there is no scar on the wound, if you treat it with bandages, and insert needles, as long as it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	The first line of the text to translate is: "de la routure de la mandibule".
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is dislocated, there is no wound, and the fracture is slight only, and it does not become two pieces, but rather a single piece, and it is not broken in two, but rather bent slightly, if one knows how to do it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the left part, to place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, then place your index finger on the right hand, and gently bend the fracture, and hold it with the other hand, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the lower jaw is described as two, then it comes that you apply an extension of two parts, as it should be equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth move or break, or there is a fracture of a gold or silver thread, then they are attached to the broken lower jawbone with a double-layered cord; and a heavy stone or piece of leather is placed along and wide according to the size of the jawbone, and it is tied to the mouth that you use, and the surgeon orders the patient to rest, and feeds light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, if it is delayed for three days, and then returns to where it was; and it is plastered with flour from a flour mill with a large amount of urine or flour from sinew, after which the broken lower jawbone is stepped on; and it is plastered with a lighter plaster, and it sticks to the mouth and does not change its position, as long as it is healthy, many times it is healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the wound becomes infected, then we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and multiple wounds, a small piece of bone may be exposed; if the bone is subtle and can be easily covered.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is wide, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have all the bones in place and there is no lack, if the wound is large, then put the stitches together according to your need; until it is healthy.
de la forcele	of strength.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceful break occurs multiple times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two, and it has pieces, and it is the lighter one to restore; or it is a fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the dislocation is when the fracture is in pain, that you have two assistants, if some paint the helper that feels the forceful break; and the others extend the collar towards the part; then set the fracture in your two hands, so that it forms as it should, and there should be no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have more extension work to do, then place the shoulder blade of the patient on the assistant's hand, with a round or oval bead of cloth or linen, according to your need; and hold it gently and pull the bead towards your hand until you can align the break, as necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you do not cut the head of the force from the defense, because it comes in front, then the patient may suffer from pain when turning his head, and place the shoulder blade on the side or the ear, and hold the shoulder blade steady until the bone of the force is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture to your two bones, and if you find the pieces loose, it may be that you must sell them; and take the lighter pieces and if they cannot be joined by any means, if the piece is at one of the incisors you have; but you must place the force of this instrument to warn the face:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not too thick, and should be as wide as you want, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the will; and there are two heads, if you see, and some are large, and others are narrow, if it is the swelling of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of aposteme chaut, if the wound is large, or you doubt aposteme chaut, if you use the wound with drapelz and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if you prick your finger with a hot iron, if it does not bleed much, apply some oil of rose and almond, and wrap it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And if you dislocate your shoulder with a hot iron, if it does not bleed much, apply some oil of rose and almond, and wrap it. Then take a very large palm leaf, then double the cloth over the cloth, and press; then take a fine suture of three to four inches long and long, and wrap it around the braid, so that the braid's end is tight; then take the needle subtle of three to four inches long and long, and insert it through the braid; then turn the braid over the thread, and tie the knot at the top of the braid, and soak the suture with clean water, and soak the salty suture; and tighten each part, and when you see that the braid holds the thread evenly, and you can clearly see that the suture does not move from the bone breakage, if it is correct for each jor, and when it is locked, if the restraint; and make sure the salty is on its back, and it puts it when it sleeps, a small orillier of oil on the braid, to raise the helper up; if you straighten the breakage by aligning the shoulder or by lifting the arm to the collar, and it does not slip out of hand accidentally, then within 20 days; then resume the pressing, if you see that it has merit, and pull and leave it as it is until it is restored; and it is restored in the most 28 days, and less than any man.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the shoulder bone breaks or becomes loose, and it does not fit well, and it is not caused by touching; if the caput humerum matches the shape of the fracture, and the shaft is adjusted according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put some powdered plaster with a lot of sulfur on the shoulder, and light spays, and put a large and thin rod, which is slightly larger than the shoulder, and adjust it so that it does not move in any part of the shoulder; if you use wool threads for the rod, so that the rod fits perfectly; and then tighten the bandage as tightly as possible, so that the rod does not move from its place, and look at it every time it loosens, and whenever it loosens, and if it is loose, and put the rod back in its place on the chest; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days, and when these numbers are completed, if you are sure, because only a light force is needed to fit it well.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone comes forward, and it does not fit well, then it is forced in, and the bone, and we do what we have said in the breaking of the strength of the painful abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is never broken in its environment, but this sometimes happens; but it often breaks in the heat.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the bone, if it does not fit well, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of blood, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and the wounds are opened in the broken bones, and it seems to be well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And the restoration is when the patient is able to move his shoulder on his own, and places a bandage between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two costals in your hands, subtly putting them equal as you can, until the bone is as it should be; then puts on splints and bandages around the elbow, or another light one, and wraps it loosely with salt or another light material, and wraps it around the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turns the belt back on the back, and tightens it evenly, and rewards each hour the loom, and if it becomes loose, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the shoulder, or pain or apoplexy, if you haste, and it becomes loose, and rinses the bandage, and attends to what has come from the ways of cures; then reassembles the bandage, and tightens it as much as it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breast fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It is said that the breast fracture does not occur unless it is large after the back, and at the head of the chest, and it does not break because they are greasy; and it feels well in the inquiry as it should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is if you let the fracture be even, as it should.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then place the plaster, and pull it with a staple, if you have the means.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breast fracture is inclined towards the chest, it feels very painful and pointed, like tears; and it is tightened, and all vomits great amounts of blood, and this is for the health of the patient, and the ancients have used great ingredients.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	If it is said that it should be administered with food that inflames the stomach, by wearing the bracelet on the wrist.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this for nothing, that if it does not work, it is not coming.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, then the right one.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And none of them say that you put gauze on the knee, to suck it out, and that seems right; however, doubt is that the gauze does not attract excess fluid to the knee due to its weak position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And none of them say that you should cover the knee with oily flour and put tentacles between the ribs to measure the limb exactly, then treat pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure through the bone that points through the sheet, and doubt arises in the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the shoulder of the broken rib, and to put aside an instrument for wardering the facial bone; and therefore it is necessary to reduce the bone, and to draw it lightly, and then to sew the edges of the wound, if they are large, and to cure them with plasters, as long as they are healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if the abscess ruptures, then if you put moistened linen cloths in oil rose, and on the wound; and cure while the wound is coming out of the abscess, and if it is painful to press on the chest where it should be, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	Of the break of the shoulder
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never does a fracture occur in the shoulder bone, and rarely does it crack; and also in the spine bone.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when you see none of this, and you know if it will be healthy or not, if you see your hands soft and swollen and lifeless, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Deadly are the various positions, and if they do not move and feel well when extracted and held, deadly is the joint of the bone, and the patient will be cured, if we put it in care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if it seems like this is coming to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if prend warde se li piez sont amollis, and the accident i are who are in hands, and if the lou dos saut ventositeit and egestion sens volonteit; and when it is sown sus son ventre, if saut egestion sens volonteit.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is sown on the back and it sees that it is hot, if it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Advices for those who are mortal: if they do not labor in their cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come, then it is the more gentle thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	1. If the patient is in pain, if it has an abscess, then apply oil of rose or ointment of mustard seed, as it is calmed; then apply a comfortable bandage and wrap, and tie it with a string, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where it feels pain, as long as it is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	2. If any bones break, then cover the wound; and put the edges of the wound together as much as possible, if it is large, with a stitch, then apply ointment by rubbing char, as long as it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the bone," take your left hand's purse from your right hand, and put it against the other hand on your shoulder, then apply the bandage and tie it up, if you can; then draw it out, and if it has broken, then set it and cure the wound as much as possible.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the bone of the shoulder
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	There comes a time when the shoulder bone is broken, and if it does, it is not usually a small injury to the head; it becomes long, and sinks into the gums, and pain arises in the shoulder, and swelling, and the broken part is exposed.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is when you extend your hand over it as long as you are above the fracture; and examine what the fracture and its shape are like; and if the fracture is only at the head, then place it in position naturally as much as possible.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	If the fracture is long or it declines towards the dens, if I guide the patient on his belly, as long as the restoration of this fracture is not clear.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have made it even, if you put on the plaster, then put on a piece of flax or wool, and tighten the fracture, if it does not move; and apply the leather to the ribs, as long as the swelling is equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if you have a fever and come, if it does not hurt, as long as the fever is calm, and put on what we have mentioned before; and then return to the restoration, and tighten it as it should be, if there are no other accidents; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is the bone that is between the upper arm bone and the shoulder blade of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be reset according to one of two methods: one of which is to use a flat piece of wood with rough edges, as shown in this figure:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then, the head of the shoulder is reset on top of the upper arm bone, and the patient's arm is held steady on the table. Then, the broken end of the shoulder is placed against the fist, as it is pushed until a small piece of wood with rough edges is reached, and it can hold any heavy object or extend the arm. Then, the patient holds the dislocation in place with both hands, until the dislocation returns to its original position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And if the patient is able to bear it, and holds his hand on his collar, then command the ministers to touch the parts that are at the bracelet of his hands, and touch the other parts lightly, and extend each to its place.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then force the fingers to be released from the bracelet, and remove the bracelet, and extend each of the ministers to its place.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the bracelet is near the shoulder of the elbow, then it is necessary to put the fingers in wet, and the other towards the little finger; and if the bracelet is towards the little finger, then it is necessary to touch the fingers lightly, without pain, as long as the bracelet is even with the shoulder and the little finger; then fasten the bracelet, as it is possible, and remove it, do not move.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	When the shoulder is dislocated and it comes out, if it is not strained for at least seven days, and it is lubricated with oil and ointment on both sides, as long as the shoulder is dislocated; then it is strained, and the manner of straining if you place the plaster on the break, then assemble the arm with the auxiliary, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and tie it, and strain with the auxiliary and with the arm, so that the arm is in its place, nothing should hinder it, or if the bone does not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	When you doubt that the bone does not move, use these and place a wider and stronger nail on each, with two spaces between them, so that each nail is as large as it passes through three parts of one; then draw the nails tighter, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more firmly and less by moving them away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	If you see the seating of the nails and the drawing, as we have said, in the part where you restore the broken member, and you doubt the swelling of the girdle, if it is left to be tightened for a week, as we have said; then look at each third day's link, that pruritus does not enflame or come to the shoulder because the sutures are too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident occurs, but rather it happens after three days or more, and the patient lies on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and then the assistant should carefully cut a piece of linen evenly, and look at every hour during the day or night, where the broken bone does not move, or is not softened by the ligaments; if the address is through the power of medicine, and the meat that we have before us, in such a way that the meat is subtle; and when it comes to be taken back, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Dislocations are caused by no joint of its own, for if it cannot be moved, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. Here comes the first sentence to translate. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output and nothing else: And it is customary that the helper and the leg are returned in
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is tight and closed, then it should be deslipped or for two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus" and the "ulna", and one of them is smaller and is located in the pocket; and the other is larger and is located in the little humerus; by chance, only the large humerus or the small one is broken, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light and the cure; but when the large ones are broken, if it is a poor cure, and more painful than when they were broken individually.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is best to extend lightly and equalize them.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, then they should be stretched more forcefully; and extend it over the thumb, and lift the palm of the hand higher than the other, and the toes should be lower than the others, and the patient's weight should be on his own foot, and some other parts on the opposite side. Then extend the joints of the arm to the part opposite the hand, either to the little finger or to another part on the opposite side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts it in place as best as he can.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is in pieces, then he puts each piece in its place, and if there are no loose parts that point to the bone, and you cannot restore it in its place, then as we have said before, set it and the bone.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken to the individual surgeon; if he takes care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of restoration, there are abscesses that open, if the dressing made of rose oil and waxy clay is not too hard or too stiff, and it is gently wrapped around, as long as the abscesses are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then the bone, and he puts the template of the powder with a lot of urine, with the sticks, so that the sticks are wider than the others; and he checks if there are VI sticks or arms in more positions: whether the break is in one of the bones, or in two; and it is tightened more under the break than other parts, and less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and the wounds that are under the break, which are moist and slippery, should not be too hard or sharp; and the strings, which are drawn, should be of linen, not too long or short, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the limb after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, if you heat the member with hot water until the itching is calmed; and let the member rest without being tightened.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the stretching, and if the limbs are smoothed and the bones are exposed, and it seems like something, then it is done.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the knots cannot come to the member because it is too tight, since it comes to the member; if you smooth it in your hands, and let some time pass, until the knots are loosened and then stretched.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	If these things do not come to the patient within twenty years.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If the dislocation is entred, then the hands can be placed on his collarbone, and it should be equal; and there should be no movement or deformation, and he should sleep on his back; and it is hoped that this dislocation is restored in XXX years or XXXV, and by chance in XX years, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the dislocation of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Wishes that on the back of the hand and as we have two come few dislocations, and only pain many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	When the plant of the hand is broken or crushed, if the patient feels pain, and straightens out in front of him naturally; then place his hand on the extended thigh, extend the fingers of the broken bones, and put them evenly in the holes, as they are well joined; then apply plaster and bandages, if necessary, then put a splint according to the quantity of the leg; and wrap it in a drape made of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the sides of the abdomen of the plant, then make a sleeve of drapes, and instruct the patient to tie it to his broken plant; then stretch from a long drape, and make the splint as large as the plant of the hand, and tighten it, if it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is at the elbow, if you manage to place a splint on it, and another on the forearm, if the hand is over the elbow and straight, then the arm will be completely fixed between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture does not involve both arms, if they are equal, then it should be fixed; and with the forearm, if you see that a splint is placed right and small to fix the fracture, and it does not move; and if the fracture is in other parts, such as the index finger or another, if it is equal, and the hand is lifted with the healthy one, or if you tie them together, as much as possible, or if you place a splint, as I have said; and take care in restoration and position of the abscess, and cut off what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken cheek
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the cheek is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward; the restoration is done by tying the ligatures of the fracture, and the other is left alone.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient groans at their face, then extends each muscle of his limb to its equal part; and it is when the fracture is healed.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is approaching the root of the cheek, then one or more of the ligaments are pulled towards the puncture, and the others are left alone.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And when it has reached the knee, and then release the ligaments of the knee, and extend the joint; then place the bone in its proper position with your two hands, according to its natural form, and then place the splint, and the bandage, if it does not move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it has become inflamed, if you let it rest, then return to your work and your care; the bandage is made in a piece-wise manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the knee with a bandage made of the first doubling to the third or fourth, and remove any excess, then bend the leg until the heel reaches the root of the nail, and place the long fil between the thigh and the leg, loosening the knee joint; then bend the leg and the thigh with the bandage, then put the brace on, and place an estile on the bone of the leg; then use the leather between the leg and the thigh to make the strap tighter, then begin to tie the third or fourth turns on the brace; and as more parts of the brace you use, and less the strap is tightened; then take out the three turns of the fil that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and the three estiles that are located there, then return to the knee joint of the chief of the fil, until you see the patella; the strap, if it does not move from its place, then let it alone, then leave it, then it will not apostime or swell or any other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, if he lets it go, and addresses what comes, as we have said many times; and if it has pieces of bone that prick, if he can, then it is possible; and if not, then it comes to cut the leg, and draw out the splinter; and the cure, as we have said, depending on how healthy it is.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is broken the furrow when we put in it nails, as we do in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration that is made, it does not clash with the patient's pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you advise that the furrow is restored in the L years, or less or more, according to the different complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the galley's gall
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the galley's gall there is little breaking, but it oozes many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, whether it is but a scratch or a pustule, and appears at all wound, and feels like a wound, and that feels better.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when you put back what has been lost to its place as much as possible, and then the plaster, and then an iron needle, if you have it, and draw it through, and tighten it as it should be, and reward all the dispositions we have said for other breakages, such as aposteme chaut and other similar things; and for every accident that it may come to, as much as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "true" by right, not "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile". And it happens all the same as with the arm, and for this the restoration is done in the same way as with the arm properly. And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg around all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, then turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bones are broken, then it is felt with great pain, and it is seen that it is well; then turn slowly.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then extend it evenly, and place the ends evenly; but be aware, if the break is ugly, and there are more pieces, then the extension will be smaller and lighter; and the aliage according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your dislocation, if you take two strips of braided hair that prick the thigh on both sides, and are long enough from the thigh to the knee, then wrap them around the leg and tie them at the knee, and lie them along the leg, and do not allow the leg to deviate to the right or left, and it is well; and no one suffers from the pain of the thigh, and it is made of hair, and you put it on to hold the movement, and properly done it is made in the break or wound; and shake each day the leg to see if it has become swollen or any other accident; if the cure as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of the bones of the shoulder
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not have a break, but the bones of the shoulder never break and must be very strong, and they only wear out in more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the shoulder break and you see these bones pushing over each other, if you put your hand on the ground, it will be very painful like frost, just like when you fly, then put your hand on the shoulder, and lift the bone as much as it comes out in its place; then press it with the thumb and thumb nails, and cut off a small table at the top of the shoulder blade, then draw it towards the shoulder, then wrap the cloth around your hand, and other things that you know.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the bone is not healed, you will find the bones uneven, broken, dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are two fractures, if they are repaired, as we have said, then put a splint on the other one according to the length of the bone; and make it larger at the end, then make a support for that joint as we have described, and tighten the strap; and if there are two or three or more fractures, if you put one on each, according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, and tighten the strap around the pike of the joint; and make sure it is hanging down from the top of the pike so that it covers well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	It is necessary that you do not overlook the other things I have said in other breaks, as we have said; and attend to each accident as it occurs.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the bone fracture of the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the woman's bone is broken, if it is set in place, then it leaned towards the side of the wrist, and was held by the hand; then the seam of the nature of the malaide was filled with cloth, and it was placed as large as I have shown; then the woman was opened, and the back was gently lifted a little at a time, and then the coton was jumped, as soon as it came to the entrance of the nature, and the bone was returned with the sto; and if she saw pissier, if the coton was pissier, and if she pisseit, she was re-seamed, and in seven days or more: if the fracture is restored, and if you see it, take a bowl of berbis, and tie it to the pertus with a cainne, and blow all the bowl into the nature; then let the cainne form, as long as the bowl is empty: the nature will return to the fracture; then fill it with cloth, and leave it for no more than days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of the arm is broken, or of the woman, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the cheek; and these breaks are not hidden that closely to the one who sets the study and the use, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break means in more positions the right way of restoration: understand the direction.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the shoulder, when it is broken, take an owl's grip and bite the shoulder; then wrap around drapes, and leave it three turns or in the opposite direction, and it will be quickly cured.
de brisure avec plaie	Of a fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, just as it is large, if it is like the bone of the shoulder or elbow, or seeming, that he be now healthy, if the wounds that we have mentioned testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the healthy wound is, if the inflammation of vitrol, if you have nothing else, then resume to restore the fracture in the same hour, or the next day, if the patient does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the patient does not come the next day, leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the inflammation is calmed, and do not touch it again on the third or fourth day, because you will cause the patient to come with an unwanted accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken, it should be set as gently as possible at the end of the knee, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not easy to put in your hands, if the splint is made of iron, seven or eight times as long as the bone, and the size according to the size of the wound; and for this, it is necessary to make three or four, according to how many there are in each case of fracture; and so it should be firm but not too heavy, so that it does not slip during compression of the member in your hand, and should be also in front, and large at the front end.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called "lance", because it is to place the heads of the bones on the head of the bone; and the bore once, as much as it rises, and let them meet each other equally.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is not noticeable, and the fragments cannot well grasp the bone, then it comes that you cover the head of the bone with your hand as much as the fragments have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you do not manage to bring the bone back, as we have said, if you cover it with an instrument that is suitable for your hand, or sharp or thin, then relieve this which is difficult in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, it is important to check if there is any malalignment in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you keep it in its natural position for a while, then apply a piece of black vinyl tape that is clean and not oily, to avoid infection and decay; then administer the medication as soon as you have reset the bone, and leave the wound open, covering it with a sterile bandage according to the size of the wound, and be sure that the wound does not become strained with the fracture; and many times it has been found that the patient's leg has improved, and they have come back to see the doctor or died or corroded never; and the stitches are more slippery and slippery than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	When the wound is large or severe, and you doubt that you will arrive in time, as we have said, and you feel pain in the leg, but there is no way to put on stockings; then wrap the leg in cloth, draping it tightly, and tie it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after the first or second day that the wound has healed, and if everything has been treated with it, and you have a remedy for painful wounds, which is a powerful ointment and similar to this.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary that you free the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is swollen and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	It is necessary that the limb be aligned in a certain way that the belly is not affected lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If they persist, and it cannot be held back but causes the belly to move, it has small pieces of bone, and it is necessary that you wrap the wound with a bandage, and all these pieces cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	If a fistula comes to the joint, or any other form of corruption, and it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is said in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	If the bone is broken and exposed through the limb, as if it were the bone of the knee or shoulder, and other similar bones of large limbs, if it is not set, because often death follows, but it leaves it until it bleeds; by chance, it may be cured after 20 or 30 years, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of the bones that come out of the cold
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come many times after the cold, and at the same time when it is near the joint, and it is a matter to see how it looks like a limb; and by chance it cannot make the limbs its own nature.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the cold has not affected it: if it is managed with warming medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, and other similar things, and you do not take any of these things or all together, and mix them with warm stomach or with an excess of beer or with honey; and they are placed in baths, and drawn well, and not slipped from the hands; and then they are loosened, and another is taken again, as long as the nodations are ostee; or if you draw a piece of well-made plaster; for the property of the plaster is that it all cures the swelling of the members; and when the nodation is already converted into hardness like a piere, and it is sore of the oster, if the raseur is made, and the superfluity is apparent; or you let it rest on any other part, as long as it is ostee, and the cure as long as it is sane.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A weak limb that is after the injury
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and weakened after the weak limbs and subtle, if there are causes: either it is because it was too tightly bound, and not as it should have been; or because it got too many stitches, and could not come to the member; or due to a multitude of inflammation; or because there were too many movements, not in its time; or because it had little blood in its body, and was weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is if you make the patient lie down on his back and tighten the cloth around him as much as possible until he does not multiply it in himself; then give him a bath, and then joy and relief; then put something on the member, if it attracts great inflammation, and often the inflammation is due to heat, until the inflammation reaches the member; and relieve it to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A dislocated limb after the joint has moved out of its place.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is swollen after realignment, and the bones are fractured open, and the dislocated form of the limb is deformed, it is not in its natural state: if one does not believe the folk who say that the bone must be broken all at once, and many others have done this in our land; and these parts are blamed, and great harm comes from it, and by chance the death occurs; however, if the wounds and tortures are fresh, and it is necessary to cleanse them with hot water or herbs that are cooked, like willows, and roots, and honey, and similar things; and I apply a mollifying ointment, as well as dyaquilon well made, and take the vismalve muscle and cook it with melted butter or olive oil, and apply it thus; or take fat figs and roast them with finely ground colon, and similar medicines that dry the sweat.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is there where the node does not continue to rub continuously and long with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be a movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is awakened and hardened, like a wound, and there is need for the healer to cut, then it comes to cover the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put on bandages and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it now comes to bring sense to the target.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if we are late, if we read it, and by chance if we reset it on the shoulder; because we cannot move it to the ear where it is swollen: many times come pain and other pains; always, when this happens, I make the patient healthier, then leave it, as long as the fever is calmed; then heat and oil are applied to the limb, then reset it gently, and cure each member as we have cured it in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the cauteries for the dislocations of the shoulder joints.
des mandibules	for the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There are times when the mandibles are dislocated, and the dislocations of the jaws are in two ways: either they are a small piece of their bones, and are softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang downwards, and close the mouth, and cannot hold the saliva in the mouth, and cannot close the mouth, and wrap around the tongue with the speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	If the dislocation is small, it returns through more positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	When it is complete and accomplished, if you reset it as quickly as possible, without force; and in such a way that the patient's hands mark the surgeon's, and cut the skin of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible, which is of the second part; and the other two hands are deformed to make them equal; and command the patient to smooth and move his jaws, and all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the patient should be aligned as it should be in its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the patient is reset, it should be done with gentle force, that is, the mandibles are assembled, as long as the hot and oily eyes are applied, until they are reset lightly; do not force the patient to reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	When they are properly aligned and the patient's mouth feels relaxed, if you put soft cloths on the cheek made of olive oil and wax, then lightly tie them with strings; let the patient sleep on his back, and his head should be between two pillows so that he does not move to the right or left, nor strain himself to breathe, but eat light food as long as the pain is steady and does not affect the jawbones; then take what you see and do not force open the mouth with the tongue and drink, as long as the jawbone is well relieved and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	When the lower jaws cannot be set in place within an hour and are not converted to their proper position, if fever and chills come on, and by chance a solution of stomach, and by chance vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, you will know that it is disastrous; and many have died in nine years.
de la forcelle	from force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot be removed from the cost of continuing the bone and the hip, and it is always dislocated at the end, and that is felt by everyone.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is if the patient is able to stand on his own two feet and extend his arms; then press the head against your palm, and it will return; then place the splint and bandage on it, and tighten it; and the one who is facing the shoulder cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is not dislocated at any time, then reset it on the shoulder, as we have said; then place the splint and bandage on it, and tighten it, and command the patient to rest as soon as he is healthy; and then realign the chest bones, when the patient is able to bear the weight of his limbs.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways the shoulder can dislocate: either it dislocates at the shoulder socket; or it dislocates at the upper arm; or it dislocates at the elbow, which is rare; and it does not dislocate from the shoulder blade, nor from the nerves; and more often it dislocates towards the shoulder socket, especially for those who have little strength, because they jump very high; for those who have enough strength, they jump a little, and return a little.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance some men hit or crush the shoulder, and the muscle swells up from an abscess, and make sure it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you examine it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	Then you will know the dislocations when they move towards the axle, and there will be a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one; you will find this difference clearly; you will find at the top of the shoulder a hole, and at the bottom the axle at the top of the shoulder, just like some holes; and he cannot bring his hand to her nail, nor move any movements; and if it is dislocated above, if it is not hidden, because you see it clearly at the axle; and this way of dislocation is not easy to return, when it is new, or when the patient is a child.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The manner is that the minister gently places his hand on the shoulder of the patient, then removes your fingers from the angle, and gently relaxes the joint at the top of the shoulder; the minister then places his hand above, extends it, and places it next to the shoulder, if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in our hands a little later, then it must be that the patient is bathed in hot water; the patient's arm is gently softening and relaxing, like a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in hot water, and is soaked; then the patient's shoulder is soaked on his back, and a stool is placed at the same level as the shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard, then the patient's foot is placed on the stool, and the upper part of the shoulder is gently held by the hand of the helper, and the muscles of the shoulder are traced; other helpers may trace the shoulder of the patient if it does not move; this shoulder is now returned to its former state, and you see if the patient follows this method: and that you cause present to the larger part of the shoulder; and it should be directed towards the chest, and bend the shoulder away from the helper's shoulder, and gently raise the shoulder above, so that the shoulder hangs downwards; and other helpers may trace the hand of the patient towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light-headed, then with him there is nothing heavy to do, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the reduction is also done in another way: and it is like this: to tie a long pole in the earth, whose ends are as a pilaster, and not too big nor too rough; then it is put on the patient's shoulder, but if it slips too far down, and the shoulder is too long, then the hand is extended from another part, and the joint returns to its place quickly; and if it does not return at all for all these things that we have said, then this treatment should be made: take two fingers of one arm and four of the other, which should enter into the socket from front to back, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie the head of the shoulder which was once covered in hair, that it was not bent by the maid, then lay it on the maid's arm; and extend some of the arms over the long shoulder, and the helper over the shoulder of the hand, then place the arm on the elbow of an armful, and extend the hands on both sides, and let the chest hang down from the other side: the joint was now straightened.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is straightened, in whatever way that may be, if you must put the arm on the elbow of a spool of wool evenly, then place a powder mill with incense and honey all over the shoulder and across, then draw the screw back on the arm, and tie the hand on the emplaustre, and make the hand warm in it, and let the hands remain still.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he drinks little, as the limb is comforted, for it heals faster; and then he should drink more after the first seven days, and move it; and if it is tight and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is stiff due to moisture that it has come, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you apply cauteries at three points, as it is placed in front of or in the chapter of cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after seven weeks, the joint does not hold and cannot raise the arm forward, then you should suspect that the nerve at the shoulder of the deltoid is compressed or extended or softened; and suspect that the joint will never return to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first line of the translation: "The dislocation that is towards the foot, and the ankles, or knees, if it is made by impulse and extension of hands, and it is managed another time; and it is cured as soon as it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing, if there is pain in the member, and then in movement, if the patient uses cold water many times, as long as the pain is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the expensive dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is said that the expensive joint has been dislocated many times and returns to its place; and it has become dislocated from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not well repaired because it can be seen and felt; and it becomes dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	When you join the male member with your hand, if you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	However, the joint is weak, and cannot be scratched on the arm or touched on the shoulder with anything.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it every time you prick yourself, because if you prick yourself, the wound will be greater and cannot be returned at all, even when it is in the buttocks; rather than other dislocations, which are more painful and sometimes result in death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration if it is possible, when it can be returned, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and your arms are expanded, and your hands are held according to the male member, from the outside and inside, and hold the joint with your fingers or at the root of your palm, as it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and proud of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to the shoulder, then it is treated with strong extension; and if two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move at extension, then turn the arm in each part, and then make a double, long, and wide strip of cloth; and when the patient feels the joint at the shoulder, if no oil can smooth the joint, then form the joint with your fingers, until it returns; and when it is at the shoulder, put a dry bandage with a piece of leather on it, and make it firm, and leave the arm at the shoulder, and let a few hairs, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly held in its place, and it is left alone, and if you see that the joint does not move well, then repeat the application and the joint, and leave it for some time until it is firmly placed; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the dislocation of the joint, and it becomes quiet, if he bathes and gently rubs it, and presses as much as it is calmed; or you put on the joint a fat sheep's wool, then leave it for one night and the bone, and let the sheep's wool enter into a bath; and when it comes out, it gently rubs the dislocation, then puts on the wool again, and then enters or takes a bath; and repeat it twice or three times until it is healthy; and if you see, if he puts on wet wool that has been warmed with butter, and presses it down; if it returns to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	The first sentence to translate is: "li dislocation de la main
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The second sentence to translate is: "Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	The third sentence to translate is: "Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sur l’apparition de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then he should place his hand on his back over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well if it does not, for if the pain of the strain is relieved by the bandages and it leaves in this sense, then one can resume.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you do not put the hand on the face after some time, for the torn joint; and do not doubt that as long as the hands are inflamed, and no pain can be endured by anything: then know that the nerves are affected, or the artery; if there is no other means than fire cautery, and by chance it is not another thing.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are at the elbow, if they are placed on the speculum that we have mentioned, then it is stretched and left for a while, then it is removed and left alone.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no pain, then the heat of warm vinegar, and rub it until it is clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Ne ever has been dislocated the hand once at any part, never at the back of the palm or belly; therefore it is set, and the dislocation is bent in your hands as it returns, then hold the chief of the other hand, and lead it to the part where it is dislocated; and leave it for a while, and then put it in place, and as we have said, and move it, and tie it again; and do this often, as long as it is tight, and if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do it as we have done before, as soon as it is clean; and do this always, when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	The first sentence to translate is "dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos". The translation of this line is 
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder of the back or side is dislocated, and there are more dislocations, if there is no treatment, for the patient's life is at stake.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	1. And the sign is that the excretions leap with volition, and cannot be held, and many times soften all the limbs, or the thighs or the two arms, or the elbow; and many times the eye moves to four points; this is called "gilepsy": the cure is that you reward if the gildpsy has come from childhood: if there is no care or sanation for all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	1. And the one that comes from the throat or from percussions or such things, say the ancient ways of cures by long words, or they have no good in all; but I have abbreviated according to my intention, and formed estrumens in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gallbladder that comes before, there is no health or sickness; and also that which comes directly in the second costal arch, and cannot be cured unless it is properly that which comes to the back, as I say; and that the gallstones are extended on the face in the first ribs equally, and cause pain to it, so that it does not crack; then form the band in the chest in the earth, and the other as piez, and tie a line through the gallbladder's nails, and the other as hainches, and as chevilles; and two ministers close the ties, the one at the chief and the other as piez, among the II tisons; and they should be well closed, the tison as we have said, and the mires put his hands on the spine form, as it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it does not return through this treatment, then take a third finger of the long arm, cut off the nail, and make the patient's shoulder rest on the finger, then put the handle of the table on the spike; and put the other handle of the table on the patient's other shoulder, and press firmly until it returns to the elbow; and if you see, then do the same for the hammer that hits the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And is it that you have two ties on the shoulder of the patient's arm, and divide them into two, and between each tie, a long nail; and in each tie, either the hammer or the nail head is pierced, and the ties should be firmly held in the earth so that they do not move; and between each tie, if the hammer turns, and the nails turn with it, and there are two nails turning on a long nail to turn the hammer; then the patient's shoulder that is between the leather straps of the hammer, and the other handle of the hammer towards the other shoulder, and each of the ministers turns their hammer on all the leather, and the masters put the spike even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When the joint is evened out, if it is covered with a drying powder with much urine, and then cleaned, and then the tablets of III doses of gilbertite and the healthy part of the spine, then it is tied with a cord as we have said, and subtle analgesics are used until it is healed; and nothing comes out of the end of health, if it comes to administer softening and desensitizing drugs with the tablet we have mentioned before; and never once does one give a piece of plaster, and never once does one come the appearance in the back of the spine of a healthy person, and one must ensure that this is not dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, because one does not have to have much presumption: by chance it could come death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of the dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The shoulder joints and the shoulder blade joints are only dislocations, and not like other joints; the shoulder joint is divided into four parts: dens, defers, devant, and derrier; and more dense parts, and less dense in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of his shoulder dislocations is that when the maim limb is jointed with the sound limb, it is longer and more open, and the maim limb's groin is larger than the sound limb's groin, and it cannot double its groin in fire; and this is the one who is shortened due to abscess chaut, because the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	When the patient arrives at the cauterization, if this accident is contrary to these fronts.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who came to the front, if they are well his leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double the genital area with pain, and if you see it to go away, if it cannot before, and retains his urine, and enflames the anus, and when he goes, if passes under the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who came to the rear, if it cannot expand his genital area, and does not double, and that leg is more tortured than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the shoulder is raised against the costal cartilage.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the case of a fresh dislocation, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to return the joint, and it becomes bent and deformed, and the limb is drawn to the side; by chance if it returns, and there is no other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, and you must use strong force to straighten the leg, and bend it with two hands or with the other leg that is placed against the patient's thigh; and others use their hand in a similar way to pull their hands away from the joints, then stretch the leg over the thigh; and some tie the head of the shoulder to the thigh; and extend both at once as long as the patient is lifted off the ground and held still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is so common as IV appearances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this is not the case, then it is necessary to apply treatment to the appearance If the dislocation occurs in the jaw, then it is necessary to seize the patient's shoulder on its healthy side, then tie the bandage on the root of the tooth, and the other limb that is loose, then tie the bandage towards the angle and away from the force; then apply a few more ministrations to the patient's arms, and wrap the large limb of the malpositioned jaw, and extend it according to the form: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	When you do not hold the shoulder in this manner as we have said, if it comes to it that you stretch the two feet of the patient's leg together with a strong tie on the two ankles, and on the two thighs, and so the patient's leg is extended twice as much as the others; then hang it from the head of a post, and place the two arms on the ground; then order the minister to embrace the head of the arm, and other ministers hanging with the patient, who embrace form the arm, because the joint returns now in its proper place.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	When the dislocation is at its full extent, if it is gripped by the patient, as we have said in the case of those who have been practiced, and draws the tie on the leg of the injured person properly, and on the foot also; then tie the strips, the head and the other at the ankle, then place the strip between the thighs of the patient in the shape of a bow; and make it wet with drapes so that it does not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the patient places it evenly in his hand, and holds the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place the table as we have said in the gilbositeit, and press it according to what we have mentioned for the well-being of the patient.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, if it comes to extend the painful leg with assistance, and as I have said; then place the hand on the painful joint, press with the other hand, and pull back towards the genitalia.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the groin, and it cannot be extended with assistance, do not lift it from the ground, but it should be as if it was extended in the groin, as we have said on the hips; and place it on your face, and extend it so that it is as we have said before, and it must press on the joint of the table; and it will be when the leg is extended, and they will be equal; then adjust the knees, and put the splint, and hold with a bandage, if the leg does not move; and rest for three or four hours, then remove the splint, and see if they are equal, if the bandage, as we have said before, and leave it for three or four hours, then remove the bandage, and let the member go forward as far as it is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it should not be pulled backwards or forward, but only lifted.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	If you command the patient to bend their knee towards their hip, and their heel does not move towards their hip, it indicates that the shoulder is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is if you make the patient lie straight, and extend the leg if possible, and put your back against their knee, and place their foot on their thighs; then take their shoulder with your hands, and stretch between your two fingers, and bend the two joints of the dislocated shoulder; and other means extend the knee, until the shoulder returns to its socket, and the signs are that the leg is gently held by the hip; and apply plaster, and make the leg aerate at the hip, and the fingers assemble firmly three or four times, then remove it; and do not cause the patient to move their limbs too much until the shoulder is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs do not respond, if there is no improvement with massage, as we have said in the treatment of the hemorrhoid, until it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the big toe
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The big toe is never used, and it is never completely dislocated, and it is often bent.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign that the ankle is dislocated is when it is bent, and before reaching the part where it is dislocated: the hands should be light, and it should be gently extended when it is only weak.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when the ankle is completely dislocated, before reaching the part where it is dislocated: the hands should be light, and it should be gently extended when it is only weak. Then sit down on the patient's right side, and use your left hand to hold the knee; then pull the leg with your right hand, and then with your left hand, and then twice, and then raise it up, and hold it well at the top of the foot; and do this twice, as we have said, by bending and raising the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, if it does not return, continue the treatment, because it will return; and if it still cannot return, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and hold his ankle firmly on the ground with his hand, and make him lie down with his back against the ground between his knees, and do not let the ankle bleed; then mark the ministers with the ankle, and extend other ministers to the patient's hands or to the leg where the ankle is dislocated; then extend them equally, and the passel should be either between the ankle bones to hold the ankle when it is extended; then put the dislocation in your hands, and mark the healthy leg on the opposite side, and the dislocation will return suddenly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When it reaches the point, if he applies plaster and covers it, and forms the bandage, and wraps it around the leg, and covers the nerves that are at the ankle joint, where the ligaments are not too tight; then he leaves it on for II to III days, and if the ligaments relax, he tightens it again; then he removes it after III or IV days, and applies a poultice for IV days; and if it does not improve by this time, it is a sign that it has not yet healed.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms, it comes, and it is necessary to ease it, as we have said elsewhere, as long as it is healthy.
des dois	The first sentence to translate is: 
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they can be extended well in work, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no way uneven or crooked, if you can make the patient lie on their back or side, and place your foot on the opposite hip, then press on the joints with your foot, as it returns; and when it is equal, and there are no gaps, if you place a table at the shoulder and the foot, then form the shape and let go, and rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, often the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in the cure, whether you are skilled in the art and have not used it long, or whether you are pitiful and merciful and tardy, do not be hard-hearted; and at the beginning of things, appease the inflammation with cooling remedies, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to the bone, unless the inflammation and pain increase; and when the limb is at the bone, if the wound is cleaned and dressed, and the pain is eased, as it should be in simple diseases, and the bones are fractured, and the pieces are small, if the bones break, follow what we have said in simple diseases; and do not enter into a state of despair, according to what we have said, for this is according to your Creator's will, and for the knowledge of your soul and body.
Amen	1. For the fire c
