O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, three sons, I have fulfilled this book that is behind the science of medicine, the fulfillment of it, and made the end through its exposures and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I have fulfilled this with the method, which is from the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is troubled in our region and is all overturned in every way, if it is perished by the science and knowledge, and there is nothing more to do than the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and ignorance, and the intentions are closed and science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems that I could bring it back to life by assembling the order of this cauterization according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will assemble the forms of the burners of cauterization, and other instruments of the work with the alignment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is their craft.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no one finds skilled hands in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who enters this to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he sees the judgment of the bones, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of the parts, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and limbs, and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of the limbs, and also of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Ypocras says that without the non with the evil is not worth, and with the will is little; and at the same time in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we say that who are not known of things said, if he tries it may be in error and may hurt men; therefore I have often seen these who enter into this science and then abandon it and sense.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I see a madman who cuts off the testicles of a man or the neck of a woman, and cuts the arteries near the neck; because so much blood issues out that the woman dies in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And if another man's wound is infected by a thorn, and the thorn is large; if it is removed with the bladder of the uterus, and he died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to treat the wound, and I see the position of the patient and the size of the piercing, and if it was not cut well, he died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And if another man's leg was treated by our king who had a broken bone, and with the splint it was plained; and the patient complained of ignorance, and pulled out the break at the plaint as soon as possible, and did not leave any pain in the plaint, and left it to heal; and the command was given that it should not be removed; and later, when the leg was completely frozen and the toe, it came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am called to come to him, and I hurried to come uncover the leg; and when I dislocated it if it was in pain and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the ways of the corruption were already confirmed or member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease by the member as long as the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another miracle that I will fall into enchantment and then inflamed by the malice of his ladyship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancre, when he is free of melancholic umor, only a touch of iron can be applied if it is not in the part of the leg that can restore what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	For this reason, trembling hands, you should know that the work of the hands is divided into two divisions: it is to know, how or it has risk in other dispositions; and I will show each page of this book where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, trembling hands, you should know that the work of the hands is divided into two divisions: it is to know, how or it has risk in other dispositions; and I will show each page of this book where there is fear and risk. And take your weapons in hand, and take your remedies lightly and firmly, and use the best way if for the grace of God you come to salvation and be healthy; and let the unpleasant diseases of grief be healed; and keep your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to another of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	1. Galen's students often ignore his advice: "Do not take medicine for illness, lest you become a foolish fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	2. I have read this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	3. The first chapter is about fire cauteries and cauteries with medicinal heat, and it is ordered by the chief up to the feet; and the forms of strangulations, and of strangulating instruments, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	4. The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is ordered and the forms of strangulations.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered by the loins' joints, and the forms of the muscles.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	However, if we remember our work, it is necessary that I give the quality of the aid and not harm to each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid, and not harming, is the longest speech and the most subtle science and the secret remedy; and for this they speak of more cases, and agree to it; and they do not complain much about their words, because I insist on longevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally with all complexions or matters, however: it is to know the following complexions: hot complexions with matter, and dry complexions with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, all matter is determined and they say that cauterization is great help; the other says the opposite: that cauterization is only good for disease that comes from choler and drought.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of hot fire is hot, and it should not be cured by hot disease from choler, or by drought; and they say those who say the opposite that cauterization helps greatly with hot disease that comes from men's courage.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you perceive the heart of the patient and its moisture at the complexion of hot fire, you release the heart's force.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I concur with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it at any time by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all paths, no one intermeddles with it but he who has experienced it and knows by long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their relapses and their spasm; others' complexions we do not know, even in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And they make it resemble and agree with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Understand, children, that cauterization resembles fire if it is a secret of the cure, and more beneficial than the ardent medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the flesh is simple, and only comes to harm when it is cooked, and does not harm other parts.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The ardent medicines come from one part to another by removing, and bring diseases of grief to the healthy state; and by chance, the patient's flesh may be too high and too beneficial in substance, and does not cause harm, if it has no superfluity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	1. And I found this in my experiments and through the service and study I have given to the art, and it is true; and for this I apologize for the length of the speech, because I only want to tell you the secret that is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, as it cures diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says by demonstrating; and you should receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	1. Know, my son, that the cauteries should be made according to their strength, and they are called first aid.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	1. I say that cauterization is useful in all strengths, because the wounds that are not healing are misplaced by the help of cauterization; and furthermore, if the cauterization is for necessary pains and hastens that cannot wait for the strength that greatest malice does not come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	1. And never think that the patient is cured once the hair is cut, for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and he says thus, but it is not so if one takes care, because cauterization is only a medicine that dries the complexion and dries the humors that cause pain, and is as good as medicine to hasten one's valor, and for one's virtue in their work and their ladyship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	2. And it is possible that the disease returns no more according to the complexion of the patient and the humors of the disease and their virtue; and they are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meat and such things, if not cauterization is administered to him or he has little superfluity and moisture, as with cauterization for pain, and the such things, and part of the pain does not return; but this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	For many people do not understand why cauterization is called a branch of medicine, and this is seen; but they only believe that cauterization is after medicine, but we understand it is false, and it is cauterization of medicine because when we administer remedies for any disease and they do not work, then we use cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Indeed, cauterization is considered a branch of medicine, but not according to the attention of the foolish.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that an instrument of gold was as deadly as one of iron, and they said this because of the quality of the gold and the highness of its substance; and they said that the use of gold in cauterization does not make any poison, but it is true because I have experienced it and found that it is true in some people; and gold cauterization is as deadly as iron cauterization, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And all that while you are heating the instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it has cooled down too much; if it is heated too much, it will cause burns; and then it is enough to prevent it.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that is why we use fire cauterization in our work, as we have already mentioned.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter of the lighter pieces, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	oil cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	oil cauterization is used for moisture and cold in the cheek, and in it is done by the cause of a disease called "soda", and by the cause of many humors that descend from the head as ears, eyes, and numerous dreams and toothache and throat pain, and also for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and semblances of disease.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is if the patient is purged by medicine that changes the hair III nuis or IIII, according to which virtues and age and habit of the patient can endure; then repeat the dose of the patient's medicine.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then place the root of your palm between the roots of his nails on his two fingers; and if you see your two means, he bleeds and washes the cauterization called "olivare", which is formed:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And he places it on the skin with ink, and descends and gently pulls your hand down and twists, then loosens your hand slightly, and rewards the skin if you see the bone I small; and if you do not see it, if the cauterization resumes as you see the bone as I told you; then take a piece of cloth, and wet and soft cotton, and place on the skin, and let it be three jaws; then make it with moistened gauze, until the burn is set; then cure the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", as long as it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said to the elder that the older the wound is, the more it festers; and for this, help is needed.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that the fire cautery should be so tight that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned of the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that the fire cautery should be so tight that it pushes into the bone, and if it is too hard, it can break the bone as wide as a needle's eye that women put in their fingers because the humors come out outside; and it should be left for a long time over the wound; after that, it should be treated and sewn.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	1. These two methods of cauterization do not seem less effective in total, regardless of whether any man has fear or not; and I believe that I should leave them; for the head of the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have experienced in other parts; and even when the patient's strength is weak by nature, the first appearance of cauterization seems more effective and painless to me, and therefore I use it in this way.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	2. of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	3. When the whole head is in chronic pain and lasts a long time, if it must use the drugs called "cochie" and purges of the head and oils and plasters; and if it is made the cauterization we have mentioned before, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	The head of the patient is of great nature and cannot be too tight; therefore, the cauterization is done on that which we have previously described as a cauterization.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After the cauterization is done on each corne of the head, as we have previously described, and then the cauterization is done on the leu which is called "the nails"; and these are those that are put in a ventsoule; and hold your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will explain further; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the corne be more subtle than those of the head's nails, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in one part of the body, and it spreads to the whole body, and the head is purged with medicines, and other treatments have been done as I mentioned in the division of diseases, but none of them help: therefore, I perform cauterization in two ways, that is, with hot medicine and with iron.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	If you apply hot medicine with a piece of alum, and it burns and scars the skin and causes it to heal in two or three days, then you make an opening in the temple where the pain is located, so that you can put the piece of alum back on; and when it is put back on, if the patient holds it well and leaves it for twelve hours, then the piece of alum is removed and the wound is dressed with a piece of linen for two or three days; then the opening is made as deep as possible until the wound is completely healed.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of inflammation, once it is healed; and if you see that there are any other remedies as harmful as those I have written or treated with dangerous drugs.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron burn, if it follows this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron burner, and its shape is as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cage or has a small opening, and it is placed on the painful part; and hold your hand and gently press the iron with one hand, as much as half of the force you can bear; and ease your hand that the artery does not burn, that is cold, and cause abundance of sweat.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting gauze on the wound, and then put the limb in three positions; then he puts fine cotton in the burette, and then treats the limb with ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this embolism with the cauterizing instrument called "cultellare" at all points, and make sure not to compress the artery in this embolism that is not too near.
de emigraine	of the embolism
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the embolism as we have said in divisions of diseases, and do not profit, and see that the cauterization before does not give any remedy, therefore it is necessary that you use the cauterizing instrument called "cultellare" as soon as it is white; then draw a line of half a centimeter from the end, and once with your hand hold the limb tightly, and do not compress the artery and do not pull too much on the bone; and wear the mandible that is silent when you insert it, and the nerves only have silence and spasmus does not come to the patient, and wear a gag for suture of the artery when it is compressed, or compressed has great pain and immediately for the one who does not know it, and who is not studied and experimented; and leave the wound in its place; but I will tell you how to relieve pain when the artery is compressed, and I will show you where the patient has been treated in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that the cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; if you see, administer the cauterization or chapter of extracting the artery, with the cauterization that has II cuts; and this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	due to cold in the ears
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear, and it is listened to with liquid medicines and other treatments as we have said in the division, and the pain does not stop, then shave this cauterization which is called "points", and its form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, thoroughly clean all the ear of the patient, or if it hurts in the ears, extract a small amount from the root of the ear as you have indicated the lobe is swollen; and do this for each ear; after curing the ear until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is those that move due to fleas, as we have said in divisions of the disease; and do not make cauterization like those that come from scabies and gangrene of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that is caused by the foul smell and excretions of the gums and mouth, and it is not worth, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another at the corner of the temple, and the third in the jaw; and place the cauterization in the part that opens naturally, and make the cauterization where the gum of the ear is pierced by a small hole in the corner of the ear, and another in the temple as far as possible like some pegs; and leave the cauterization as long as it does not hurt half of the tooth; and this is the form of the cauterization.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The appearance of the cuttlefish that we have placed before you is similar, but it is more subtle and should be a bit larger than the ones we have shown earlier; after treating the fish as we have described, as soon as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy occurs and you treat it as we have described, and there is no fever, and the patient does not have a high fever, then make four cauterizations: two on each side of the forehead, one on the forehead, and one on the lower lip that is called "vasels" as we have described earlier, and cauterize at the mouth of the stomach; treat them as we have described.
de litargie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	The first sentence to translate is "S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.
de la froidor dou chief	Of the cold head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed with years and what we have said before; then the head is heated by the physician, then the cautery is made on the head and each horn, and the neck and three on the spine; and if you have more experience, and the body is moist and the patient is weak, and the disease is far, then make four cauteries on the spine; and let it remain as long as the least pain remains, and ease your hand; after the cure as soon as it is healthy, and as the cauterization that we have called "olivare" before.
de l’epilempsie	Of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilepsy should not be used for cauterization except for those who are fleamatic, and it is first necessary to modify the brain of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division where the patient is large and suffering from poor medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is children who cannot endure it, I make a gargle and mastication modifying the brain often with good meats; then I put them back in their environment, and I do the cauterization according to what we have said before, and on the vein, and on each corne; and if the patient is faint and suffering, I do the cauterization as I have said to the one who has paralysis and mollification of the corners, on the spine of both sides and the neck, and it is the olive cauterization according to the way we have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is asleep, make the incision subtly according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excess or corrupted moisture that becomes large and flabby, therefore the cauterization of parts as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is the excessive decline of melancholy, and the heart of the moist patient becomes melancholic, then it must drink something according to what the mind is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the moist patient; after making a well-made linen bandage, as well as circling it, if you put it on his head; and if the patient thinks he has a fever, and is well held in all parts; after applying the liniment, and let it be rubbed with old honey; and the patient is heated with fire, so that he can endure it; after opening the circle by removing it from his head, and letting it cool down; and do this once a week with another government of boin, as long as he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see the burning of the wound by making multiple pricks with the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterizing dries the eyeball greatly; then it is placed on cotton wool in a greasy linen cloth.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eye's hair
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye comes first as hair, according to the signs I mentioned earlier, then it begins and soaks in the ointment, cleansing the face, and washing all moisture, and it is scrubbed or bathed more times than usual.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After washing the face, I cauterize the face, and I cauterize on both temples where the hair ends, or if it ends in one, and then all the veins and arteries that are exposed are cauterized according to the size of the temple; and it is washed with ointment, and if too much sweat comes out, it may be too much for you as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incising the cauterization as you would have it; and never is it done that one burns or cuts the two bones of the heel.
dou cors des larmes	great tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and appear on the cheeks, or are the arteries that are in appearance of the white of the eye; and one sees that it is an excess of cold, moist fleshy substance, therefore I make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the descent of the eyes: I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on both temples, and I cauterize or cut off the two bones; and if it is needed, then the cauterization becomes wise as soon as it is in the smallest cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	A large amount of tears comes from the densities of the hairs
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit, therefore, drink mild masticated wine; after that, you raise the head, and make a cauterization where there is one that can be made with olive oil; and make two cauterizations of olive oil that are called "clavilis" on the two shoulders, a little drying of the cheeks; and wrap the artery that you do not close.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cauterization that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the wound is softened by disease and moisture, therefore the cauterization of this cauterization called "oil" is applied.
de coi ci est li forme:	If it is not, then what is the form?
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that I am doing this cauterization on the two horns as well as the hairs; and do not let your hand go until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Do not cut the hair that does not have oil.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never has it happened that the hair of the oiled ones turned into a beard, and they prick the oil, and then they are cauterized according to two ways: it is known as fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then put the midwife in your trust; afterward, cut off the hair of the child according to the figure that is most like the flower of the muse, and also the beginning signs of the hair; then she puts fine cotton on the oil and moisturizing lotion of perfumed soap, then wash the cauterization with the form that is like this:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cauterization on the part that you have pricked a few times, let the edges heal; and the signs of health of the wound are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise to the point of the oil; then gently place your hand, and let it stay for three days, then put on cotton wool until the scab falls off; after the treatment of ointment as soon as it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come out, and the paper is softened, then resume the cauterization on the same part, as you have done before; and if the hair is thin, if the cauterization is done when the paper is raised to its natural point, and is even, and does not touch the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The first sentence to translate is: "Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have had this for a long time, if the medicine does not help you.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, if you lift the leg, and see that the paper is raised as it was raised by contraction of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if not, then apply more medicine on the leg or if the medicine has not been applied, as long as your efforts are equal, and your eyes placed at a distance; then put cotton wool on the wound as soon as the swelling is less, after curing the leg with the ointment called "dyafenis" and other, as long as it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have the skill to well care for your health with great care, so that it does not lack any medicine.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then continue the medicine on the part that has become softened by the proper paper, as you have done before; afterwards, until it is healthy. And this is the form of the flute:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the size and thickness of the men are different, according to which you have restrictions; and do not be confused by the right way to this study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	The treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, therefore it is necessary that you cauterize according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to cut his hair evenly on your hand; then roll it between your hands in a manner that it does not move or change its shape. After that, put cotton wool in the nostril or in the juice of a persimmon seed; after heating the cauterization tool as divided: and press it at the hair if it forms like a pen point, assemble the cauterization tool so that it is on the hair; if you see, if one end is cut off from the other, and if you see, if it is like a tent; but remember, whatever is pressed will be useful for your purpose.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it becomes swollen, and the exudate is drained; if it remains closed, it may cause the bowel to twist; then form the cauterization chaw, and hold your hand on the cauterization point at the part where the oil is exposed, so that your hands do not get greasy; and place the cauterization in the oil grease, and corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterization, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then continue the cauterization once more, and if you have the skill, and leave it for three days; then place cotton wool on the bure, and apply the desiccating ointment as long as it is dry, and when forty days have passed and it is dry, if you apply an acidic corrosive medicine to the bone until it is exposed; and follow according to what comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas that no ancient one mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand the fistula, and then put in the forceps of coi. After that, there is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make it to the size of a .з.; and hold your hand with the forceps closed, and do not move the patient until the plasters have melted and stuck to their oil; and it is necessary to put on the oil in cotton wool or in abin d'uefz or in awes: the plaster if it is large enough for the fistula, and it is healthy for the health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the fire cautery we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer antibiotics to the newborn, and to bring the fistula back to its own body according to what is appropriate for the specific wound.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are cracks in the lips that are called "cracks," and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks according to what we have described in divisions, and the patient does not improve, then use a small fire cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place them in those cracks as much as they can fit; after curing the lew with cerate until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the gall
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the root of the gallbladder or uterus, or bladder, or roots of teeth, and it becomes inflamed and forms a fistule; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit well: therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize according to the size of the fistule; after the bolt or rupture of the fistule, and hold your hand until the fire comes from the fire, and when it goes out; and make once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, as long as it is healthy; and if it is cured once, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to reveal the lew and open the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it does not work, then put a piece of cloth soaked in warm water on your mouth; afterwards, scrape the cavity that was made, and put the teeth back together as best as you can, and hold your hand tightly so that the patient feels the pain coming from the root of the tooth; afterwards, gently release your hand and continue the cavity according to your will; afterwards, fill the mouth with warm salt water and rinse it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in part, the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gum becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture is corrupted and dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from coldness, or if there is coldness or to see, and the remedies of medicine are not effective, then it is necessary to have a master in cauterization in two ways: cauterization with a bore and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with a bore if it is such that you burn the hair of a sheep, and the end in a iron or copper nail; then take cotton and wrap around the point of a pin, and make the burned thread on the painful tooth, and hold as long as it is cold; and often I do this until the virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton in the burned thread are charred, and put on the painful tooth, and put on a copper nail as much as the flesh is on the chew of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	1. When the fire cautery is used, if it is large enough to bite on a piece of iron or gold, and it is thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; then heat the cautery, and form it after it, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cool; do this often because the pain will be eased for either the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	2. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with hot water in the pressure of this cautery, and then releases it; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	I make a cut of the part you want, according to what you can bear; and this is the form of the knife:
des scrophules	of scrophules
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are wet and cold, and do not respond to digestion with medicines, then rinse the knife blade after it comes out of the form, and make two openings for the fumes to exit from the other side; and place the knife blade on the abscess once, or as it suits you, until it reaches the point of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then make the knife according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in for three days; and wrap it with soft cloth as much as the wound allows, after curing the wound and the fleas as much as it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the chain:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture reaches the cold chamber, and at the same time when this comes from a cold complexion, it is necessary that the patient be treated first with soluble medicines; after which I perform a fire cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure you do not go too far into the throat, and do not burn the skin but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards I perform another cautery at the joint of the shoulder, and it is called "clavicle" as we have mentioned before; and treat the limb as we have mentioned before until it is healthy.
de la toust	Of the whole
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the parts of the body are affected by cold damp, and the patient has no fever and is weak, and the disease is chronic, then make cauterizations on the strongest parts of the body as desired; and the other cauterization is made between the second and third toes; and that cauterization called "clavicle" is according to the form given earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cauterizations by pricking at the entire cauterization called "points" according to the form given earlier in the disease of the ears; and let the points be about 30, or fewer.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the wound according to what is said above, and let it be burned with this form of cauterization:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because they are lighter, because you do it in three parts per copy.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After you have soaked the patient's back and chest with water; after relieving the pain that has been caused by the titillation, using your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, then cauterize it with this form of cauterization:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And cauterize the wound as much as it can be pricked, and it would come out with the first burn; and this is done with a cauterization iron that has three needles, because the figure of cauterization is six needles; and these needles are according to the subtlety of a tent and that is the form of the cauterization iron that has three needles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never has it been adjusted to this one nerve because it has eight burns:
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After you put the cauterization iron on the nerve, and after the patient rests, and do not move the limbs too long as they are well comforted:
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	If the dislocation is reset, something happens quickly, therefore a burn cauterization is made on the thick skin of the cauterization clavicle, or wherever the cauterization is applied.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is cured.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moisture come to the stomach, and they are pulled out as soon as possible, and the purging is given to him, and the usual cures are performed, but he does not benefit, it is necessary that the patient be tied on his back, spread his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	1. For this reason, I made three burns on the nail of the big toe due to the quantity of a dose, at all the cauterization points, and two burns on the sides of the two toes so that the cauterizations are at three angles, and there should be space between them as they will produce sweat when they grow hair; and they should be like this so that they do not prick the two parts of the nail, and the figure of the cauterizations should be according to this form in a straight line.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	2. And if you see a large cauterization on the stomach according to this form; and the person who feels pain from this cauterization, should cauterize by touching and pressing on the stomach at the point where you see the quantity; then the cauterization should be made on all the points called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the cure we had before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	After the pain in the liver comes from wind and moisture and large ventosity, as long as it is properly placed according to its natural complexion due to superfluities; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, and if it does not benefit him, then the patient should be shaved on his affected side; and sign of encephalitis according to this form and figure and quantity in the liver, and either the hypochondria or the costal cartilage comes; and there should be space between each cauterization and the growth of a tooth; and they should be long enough to cover the entire cauterization; and so only the half of the knee, and so the patient should press with his hands on both sides; and if it cannot be done, then it is better to be crooked, and extend his legs, and lean on his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you wish, if you burn these sharp-pointed cauteries, be careful and gentle in your craft, and make sure you do not burn all of the flesh, for you will dry out the entire body; and that it does not become doughy, because the hair is too fine to be seen.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has ascended to the liver, and you see whether it is in the liver or the cloth: if it is in the liver, the physician feels great pain but not too much; and if it is in the cloth, it feels sharp pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment has cured the wounds, if the physician finds that the hair is thinned on his head; then stretch the limb or where the cauterization was, and then heat the cauterization that is similar to the raisin, according to which form it is.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	For the fire cautery, burn until the hair is gray and brittle, and then cut it off; after the cure, according to the cure of the flesh as it becomes healthy; and it is only this cautery that has caused no harm to anyone who has studied medicine for a long time, and by these hands these diseases have never been corrupted once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Can it be done boldly, and I think it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	A cautery of tears
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make of tears a cauterization, and in this manner: take an aristolochia root long, the longest you can find, and let it be dry and as large and long as your two; and rub it in oil, and take it to the fire and burn the cautery between the force and the col, and make two punctures as you descend on the side that is bare of the beard; and make two punctures between the fifth costa and the seventh, descending down from the shoulder; and make a puncture in the pis, and the other in the stomach, and in between the spines, and in the two pis that are defending the cautery between the spines; and do not press too hard with your hand, as you would smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no ancient one has ever heard of anyone using a fire cautery like this, and they thrust it between the ribs, as soon as it reaches the abscess; and then there is great pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, pain or the patient's death now occurs, or a fistula comes which cannot be saved.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the mouse disease as we have said, and it does not profit, therefore there are three ways of cauterization that you know.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	1. If you are making three cauterizations or four, according to the length of the hair, according to the figure of the cautery of the belly that we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient's arm be on his back; and another way of cauterization if you are shaving the cautery that has two nipples, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and soften the hair where the hair is long, or the scar of the patient comes from the side, and make the elevations according to the hair, according to the length of the chest, and the cautery should be according to the width of the chest.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After the two nerves are inflamed as much as the pain is perceived from the other side, then take out the cauterization instrument, and then it will be used on all three. And if you see, then cauterize the entire cauterization instrument with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has gotten watery by long tension, and this is enough that the other cures before say.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for dropsy, for it is done in the way called "asclepytic".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the ways we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four caustics through the bowels, and one through the stomach, and one through the liver, and one through the lungs, and two through the back, and one at the end of the spine; and let the cauterization be well near the spine.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the cauterization be done by gritting one's teeth with long endurance, and not leaving the care of the patient after the cauterization; and the healing will speed up, and they will all align together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterization is made on the abdomen, either with the rib that we show before; and on the back, it is olive-shaped, according to how it is placed before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the wrapping of the nails
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the nails are wrapped with what is hydrous, and are plain like citrine, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the pierced finger between the auricle and the anus; and gently hold the cauterization with your hand without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much on the front, otherwise it will be too tight, and let the awl of the citron be in, and follow the cauterization according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterward, make two cauterizations on each leg at the pointed end of the cuticle; and let one be long and the other short, in front of the thigh and the other behind, according to the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time to cure, that the awl may enter; after the cure of the other cures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and nutritious virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are swollen and inflamed, and cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient very suffering and of strong yellow color, if make a good cauterization on the stomach according to what is spoken of before or on the stomach, at the cauterization circle; and four cauterizations are made around the bowel subtle, and two cauterizations are made on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then perform the fire cautery on the pointed end, and on each side, and make small cauteries on the stomach belt, because the cure is beneficial when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of the hematomas
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hematomas are either newly formed, or one or more, and they are old and have large amounts of cold, moist, corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and if not beneficial, if cauterization is made: III on the spine of the back, which is completely deflected and bent in many places, and the cauterization on the belly II doses; and if you think that the stomach is cooled and the meat is not cooked, and the face swells, then the face on the stomach cautery as it is said before, and the liver, and the gallbladder at all the cauterization clavicles; and leave the cauterization over long ten days.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the wound as much as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the chalcidite which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you use thelul, if the fire cautery appears as a raser, then put it all burned on the thelul coped; and leave as much of your hand as the cauterization comes to the vein's birth, without cutting; do this once or twice, and if you have more thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after treating wounds as much as they are healthy; and if you use a large fire cautery on a catapult, it will give more help.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure tightness or opening, which we will tell in his presence if he falls ill that cannot be cured by burning, then cauterization is necessary.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no fistula, and it is awake and has a slimy and moist tissue, if you provide enough of this substance, and make sure to keep all the tissue as it is, then...
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the cauterization is washed and rasped, and it is pulled out of the fistula according to the quantity that enters, and is reapplied as soon as the wound is clean and uncorrupted, once or twice, depending on the amount of ointment; and the patient is warned about the nerve that is involved, and large wounds.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	1. If the fistula is in the course of the uterus and intestine, if these were caused by these lews, and only to make this happen in the throat, and think that it is not a human being; after curing the throat as much as it is healthy, and if the lew is removed, and the materials are long bones, then it is certain that the throat is completely healthy; and if the materials are not long bones, then it is certain that the throat is missing, and the bone in the font. And so one of these that we will say in his throat.
de la maladie des reins	2. of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the head comes on suddenly, and with large ventritis, and no woman is at hand, then it is necessary that you cauterize it on both sides of the head at the clavicle that we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize it in a minute, there will be three caustics in line, and they will do more good.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is large and weak due to headache and moisture, if the patient retains urine, then it is necessary to cauterize in the part called the funnel above the bladder, either on the left or right, and so that each cauterizes once; and cauterize the back of the funnel, or II may do it twice; and so the cauterizations are clavicle according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	Of the marriage
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wife is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flow is corrupted and delayed; and when they come, they feel great pain: therefore it is necessary to make three cauterizations along the belly, as we have said or cauterization of the bladder, and it should be cauterized to harden the back. And if it is a cauterization of the clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hair
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the groove of the hair, and for this reason if it is silent from the limb, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the legs are in different departments desired, if it comes that you cauterize the patient on the groove of the hair at the cauterization like a circle, and sign before the limb turning towards the groove so that the groove is in the circle; and if it is the cauterization such as those made on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, make three large olive-wood cauterizations, and they should be as similar to each other as possible; and the cure once it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	the pain of the heel
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the heel of the foot, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is cured as we have said in the division, but the disease is old: then it is necessary to purge the patient of large amounts of fetid pills or other bone-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the manner of cauterization is according to two methods: it is known as assembling hot medicines and cauterizing with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	1. If the fire cautery is followed correctly, then some are like this: You should cauterize on the handle of the tail, using three triangular forms according to this shape, and making a good depth and large size between each cauterization of the spine, and it should be olive oil; never cauterize on the base of the tail, because there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	2. And if you see, if the cauterization is made at the circle we have mentioned in the dislocation of the tail; but make it in a way that the circles contain the entire tail, and all its points are equal, no matter how large or small they are.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	Here is the translation of the line: "And it is the way one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach the knee or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Here is the translation of the line: "And if the pain reaches the knee and the leg, one should cauterize there, as the physician says that the pain holds, and one should cauterize the ankle four times, on the left side a small piece; and it is the cauterizing cutaneous, and the flesh that is most sensitive to touch; and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to two or three points or near the cautery which is called 'points', then it should be cauterized there.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the labor is difficult, I make him more; and if the pain is towards the thigh, I burn with the cauterizing iron or the circular one, and you do well to keep all your cauldrons that you do not burn too much the cauterizing iron but burn the nerves and the large arteries, and do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I have also seen others who made the cauterization on the ankle, and they burned so much that the leg became entirely blackened, and the foot, and it was noticed and corrupted all the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly, where he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts assembled, make a burn in one and the other according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the surgeon said in the burn of the thigh, according to this manner, make it thus and so at the end as big as some large nail or less, and so by interlacing and so between them without spacing the quantity of a new piece; and they should be interlaced over two parts, and also like noses, and have a good handle; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And let it be washed as many times as it is all red and greasy, and then put on the handle of the malady's chisel, and make it bend on its own healthy cost. And the cauterization is once, and the cautery leaves three jors; and then apply ointment, and leave the wound open long enough; after the cure of the ointment as it becomes sound.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	1. Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of its pain, and we see little that uses it; and all this is like burns that can be endured, and either he afflicts or not.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The first line of the text is: "Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the handle of the axe on the patient's shoulder, gripping it firmly with both hands; after heating the handles of the axe in the warm water that is heated in the fire for one hour, and the patient suffers from the axe's chill and arsenic.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the burn is similar to fire; and when the burn has healed, use the instrument to lift the handle of the axe gently, raise it smoothly, and leave it for three days, and put on whatever is black in the bandage as long as the burn is black; and then leave it for three days until the skin is dry; and this will help after the cure of wounds as long as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that traces according to what you did in the hair growth; and this is the way of the hot tool, and I have written or described the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Prepare alkaline and live charcoal, as much of one as the other, and mix them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or if there is a small hole that the point of a razor cannot enter, and put in another pot well-plotted, and add alkaline and charcoal and soft ash, as much as you have two of the powders you will have well-mixed in your hand; and let it sit until it drips wax or can be poured, then take all of this wax and mix it with charcoal and alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	When the patient is cold and feels lightheaded from the medicine and cauterization of other parts, she will feel dizzy as if it were fire. And in other medicines where they burn the hamstring well, like hazelnut oil, anacardic acid, and chalcedony with soap, all these things mixed together will make her feel lightheaded.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galien tells us of a remedy where some were cured of the pain in the thigh and sciatica, and he was convinced that no other cure was needed, and that it would be completely cured in one session after this remedy was applied, and he was bathed as he instructed afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And then in part, as you prescribe to take a piece of fresh and dry vervain, and make it with a little grease, and put on the shoulder, and on the thigh, and on the leg where the pain is, and leave it for three hours, and according to the quantity that the patient does not feel the tightness anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then I let it enter a bath as much as the chest is raised, and I let it enter a lemon, and the pain will disappear entirely and it will be healthy again.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And advises that no one should use such cauterizing medicines, unless it is after the evacuation of the heart.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Diacorides says that if the sciatic nerve is cauterized with the horn of a goat and it helps, then it should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the linen and oil it well, and place it in the hole that is between the little finger and the other, which is called the fossil.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After drying the goat horn and heating it until it is charred, and then putting it on the linen, and leaving it as long as there are stains; and repeat this several times, until you feel by touch that it has reached the skin, and that the pain is subsided. And this method of cauterization is called "cauterization with goat horn".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by touch or percussion, or from too great evacuation, or from the appearance of expanded cold matter, none of these appearances is worth cauterization, but rather from that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the patient has been purged of fetid pills or other substances, that you apply them to the back where the pain remains, three lines of the thread are marked, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the skill and quantity that the patient can bear; and it should be done according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see, make III cauterizations or IIII at the clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often affects many children, and the signs of the beginning are when they have narrowed eyes as they cry, and fear; and you see the spine of their back and the appearance that comes with the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and it is cured, if the cauterization is done on the cauterizer according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cauterization penetrates every part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if the cauterization is done at the end of the spine with the cauterizer touching lines 2 or 3, and they are points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the joint as much as it is healthy according to what we have said, and warned that you will not perform a fire cautery on the bone that is in the spine of the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is due to moisture that has expanded to each corner of the body, and when pain comes from blisters, which are properly called "gout," and when it is of cold cause and medicines do not cure it, then it can be cured by cauterization in this way: make a cut around the joint of the pain, and let it be olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if you wish to pluck at the cheek that is red, then burn it with fire cautery at the entire cautery as claimed "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pain comes to the joints and other joints, and this happens many times, then burn it with fire cautery at three or four points on each part of the olive cautery; and if you have skill for more, but do not hold your hand too long as the pain may increase.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pain descends to the joints and to the back, then apply the cautery we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	If the pain remains in the hand, make incisions every two lines; and if there is no more pain, make incisions at each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes from the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and govern the patient's behavior with words and prescribe medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make the patient behave and purge the filth, they will be cured by God's grace.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the face
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	If the rupture comes in gashes, and the wounds descend as cuts and it is new, then when you see that you are curing it, do not let it mix with the old; and use things that relieve the stomach, if it descends from the stomach; after which make it lie on your back between your hands, and command that it lick its own hair as much as it can, and tie it to your two thumbs, and sign 'closed' at the end of the rupture on the bone, and in a way that is resembles the other half of a circle around the corner of the corse; then wash the cauterization with the form of it:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and has a glisten.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then clean the bull's balls on your leg; and the surgeon will stain his hand to make sure they don't come out; work well on the thighs with the fire cautery, and put a piece of cloth on each thigh, and another on the other side that touches the thighs; then place the cauterization sign on all your hand, and hold it correctly and as far as you can reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, repeat it again until you touch the bone; and be careful not to let the bull's juice come out when you do the cauterization, not to burn it; and so that the fire cautery does not kill or cause other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you question whether, when you have not come to the bone in the cauterization, your efforts are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	It is necessary that the cauterization of children be gentle according to the size of the bone, and for adults even greater; after three days, cure the patient with fire as hot as possible until the burn is healed; after treating other injuries as long as they are healthy, and let him rest on his back for forty days while the wound is well soaked; and it is necessary that his bandages be loosened for a long time, so that the dressing does not stick when he gets up to relieve himself in the chamber.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, he will find a well-made girdle, and every four days; and he should rest, so that he works quickly and does not have too much intoxication of drink and spices, and too high braiding; and when he teaches this lesson, it is completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after the cure of trimming in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, he should re-cauterize according to the quantity, and it is the third angle according to this form; after the cure according to what we have said; and no of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at a three-angle according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	The first sentence to translate is: "But the sign of the joint is that it is wide and has a rough surface, and another is that it is painful.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	The first cauterizations are less painful and difficult.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	There is no pain in any part of the body.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes from nowhere, either from cold or injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and the remedy of medicine does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize at the cauterization point called "points", and to set the cauterization according to the length of the limb, its thickness, its frailty, its verticality, its location of torsions and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cauterization is painful, that's fine; if it's not, then continue with another cauterization on the same part of the body, because it is customary for the patient to die in the member that is affected, as long as the patient is still alive.
de meselerie	Of the surgeon's tools,
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The tools of the surgeon are never used once by cauterization, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the cauterization, when the disease is at its beginning, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither does it displace nor tire, and you doubt that corruption will spoil all the patient, therefore I do the cauterization on the head: I cut off the head, and the other towards the front at the end of the thighs; and they seize the horns, and the tail behind the hamstring; and it lasts so much with your hand that the cauterization reaches the bone, and as much as the wounds issue forth so that the vapors of large humors may issue forth; and I cauterize on the nails according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	1. If the wound is scattered everywhere; it is evident, if you cauterize it with these cauters we have mentioned or chief, and the cauters in one place, and the cauters on the spine of the collarbone, and the cauters on the spine of the back, and the grip and the other parts, and the elbows and the ankles, and the tendons of the knees, and all the joints of the hands and feet, and the fissures of the hands; and you will find nerves that are located below the skin, which you should not burn, and no time has been made for a cauter on the bone of the elbow, and the other on the stomach bone, and the other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	When you perform more cauteries, the patient benefits more and does not feel pain in the cauterization as much as healthy people do, because the heart is already corrupted to some extent.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It should be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in different ways with iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the shoulder with flour for days with honey and other remedies until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the member is completely healed by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not yet healthy, then perform cauterizations on the member according to its size and thickness; and insert one cure into the deepest part; then cure the wounds as they become healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never once has a cauterization been made on the hand, arm, and back, where the nerve is silent and the member is not affected; and none enters if they are not aware of the members and the courses of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	of barbs
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as "albaras" is awakened, and the art of medicine does not help, then cauterize with a cautery a small piece, according to the amount of the heat, until the blenching is ostee and the color is mute; then use flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and senna and aloe, for each part; and mix them all together, and bind with a bandage, and apply to the limb as long as it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When syphilis appears at the beginning, and you see it stop, if it is cauterized with the cauterization tool that seems like a circle, all around the entire circumference of the sore.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And they all say that it is necessary to cauterize the area around the sore; and this does not seem strange, because I doubt that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have always wanted this to happen once; and the most accurate thing is that it should be cauterized around the entire circumference of the sore, using the cauterization tool called "circular," as we have said before.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	From the inflammation that cannot be measured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	If anyone has a disease called "adulatia", and it delays in measuring either due to excessive production or because of the patient's old age (that is, too much) and lack of strength, or because of tightness; and you see it hurting to measure: therefore, use cauterization outside of the mouth with small cauterizing points as they are pricked; after that, leave it alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hurt to measure.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it hurting at all the cauterization, if the cauterization is hot, then its form is like this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the environment of these diseases called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has perceived the kind, and such cauterization that the patient feels defuers in a certain way that the course of the diarrhea is aggressive.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, when it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a mangy of the limbs, as it eats the limbs just like dry hair.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the leg that can suffer cauterization by fire, then sharpen the cauterizations clavile as small and great, according to where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts until all corruption is removed, and nothing remains of it, that everything that is corrupted is not osteit.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then it is left for three days, and it is put on the burned parts that suffer from blisters with oil as long as the burns are not healed and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of burns caused by fire.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that no healthy burns are born, it is good; and if not, then resume the cauterization on the parts that are still corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this disease has never been cured by medical care in the place of fire cauterization; but all fire cauterization is greater help, and I have already said that the treatment of medical care in the division: take the amount you have skill in.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the porings that come to the peel
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often there comes to the peel because of defenses against a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a great thing that causes pain in the limb.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know that cauterization is by fire, and cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cauterization by fire is when you heat it like a hot iron, and it is made of a thin piece of iron the size of a pen, and it is heated until it can pierce all parts, and it has subtle margins; after you put it all around the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail as it comes to the end of the nail; and it leaves three days before it starts to seep sweat; then I make a poultice of well-cooked, soft mallows with hay, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will be loosened from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat the joint with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then, if the joint becomes infected many times, and in the hands and fingers, it may be that you need a hot iron cautery; and it should be done in this manner: take a nail or a piece of iron, or a thorn, and put it on the nail and the hoof, so that you do not get warts; then put the nail on so that it touches everything around, then put a hot awl, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand as you turn until the edge of the nail touches the root of the hoof, and you will find the hot iron way through the root; then suffer the pain of the hot iron for a little while, then remove it, and it will fall off all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	I then make another cut, as long as you have cut through all these that are in the course, then I will treat the wounds that engorge blood.
li cure dou trembler	I will treat it so it does not tremble.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If the patient trembles due to cold, or fever, or other causes, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations or four on the spine, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization at the stomach with olive oil cautery; if it continues to tremble, and it gets healthier from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pustules that have appeared.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No time is seen by defeats the body, such as baths or pustules, that come from large corrupted materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary to burn the first time when they appear, cut a subtle fire cautery of mart or if the point is seized by fire, or of the cautery of Aristotle's root, or of the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never are cauterizations made at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they do not grow warts forward, but are disordered by the superfluity that comes, and they are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is tied off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great dislocations of blood from the artery that is tied off at the wound which comes to the pardefuers, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the fire cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a sad thing to have to open the vein.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And if there is none, then whatever you have to put your finger in the wound of the vein, and hold it as tight as you can until your finger is numb and no longer hurts; then heat the olive oil cauteries more or less depending on the size of the wound and how red they are; then I, or however great or small according to the wound and the leu in case the artery is out of place, put the fire cautery on the vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until it is no longer burning.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If the fire cautery is still burning when you tie your child's vein, and it has stopped, then quickly take another one that is hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do this one after another until the wound is fully healed; and be careful not to burn the flesh that is sensitive, and avoid other harm coming to the patient; and know that as soon as you do not cut through the artery, it cannot well heal immediately once the artery is large, if it is not by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cauterization or extraction when it is properly treated, or by very gentle twisting, or by medicines placed on it that can cause inflammation; and make sure to tie and extract it carefully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will tightly fasten the hair with strings or tourniquets, or other similar things, should not profit from it if it does not work.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is none and there is no remedy or medicine present, then he must put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and then firmly press until it is sore from the wound and the vein; and he should not move much, but his hand is often cold so that it does not freeze and becomes numb and sore; and he should make sure to use tools and medicines for cauterization.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	1. We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases, whether it is to cauterize with fire or with burning medicine, and their causes, effects, and forms of cauterizations; and I have put this chapter of cauterizations in the hands of the chief surgeon, and I will go to this chapter by my own way because it is lighter to travel with the one who knows the way.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	2. And if I begin this, you should know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauterizations, and for this reason there is greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	I warn you that you are doing madness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come in treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have been so sick with their disease that they died lightly by the force of the remedy they took for their disease and the greatness of their malice; and from these we should fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these I tell you, saying: "Wait, I am a healer"; and the disease is cured.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is only necessary for you to allow those who come to you who have this way, but put more weight on your honor than in your counsel, and do not believe everything that seems certain to you, and that you can have taken or lost; and use divination and indication in the cures of your patients according to the health of the patient; and this will help you to this good reputation, glory, and memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very good advice, my Lords, you will receive a good understanding and direction, and if you will seek the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or, in this chapter, I have ordered the cauterization according to the cauterizations, as it is before or during the cauterizations of the patients, which I have ordered for the head, because you will find it more lightly, as you will have to deal with it.
dou chief plein d’aigue	dou chief plein d'aigue means "the head full of sweat
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often occurs in children many times in infancy, and when the child is pulled too hard on the head, and never has it been caused by anything else that is known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in adults, and only in children that have died from it; and therefore I think that it is worthwhile to skip some chapters in order to treat them.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I see the child of who the shoulder was swollen, and the head of each day as he could not sustain it; and thought so much the moisture that it was dead, and this moisture is assembled between the bone and the syphac, from the knee to the bone; and the dislocations are such when the moisture is between the knee and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a cut large on the child's shoulder; and so long as the swelling continues, so is the form of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture increases and the abscess is larger, I make cuts in the shape of a cross according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is gone from the bone, and you see the signs of the skin being stretched over each part, and the sharp pain that occurs when you press with your hand on the tendon, and this does not seem to be relieved: if it comes to pass that you have to cut off the head III times in this manner.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, all the moisture is drawn out.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After drawing out the skin flaps and powders, and pouring in wine and oil, and leaving it for five days; then remove it, and cure the wound with plasters and poultices, and draw the head evenly, and then apply dry, moisturizing meat to the member as much as possible until it is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to look at or open the great end of the abscess, and the surrounding gutter; for it is never in front, never on the side, never on the back, and never on the side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Make sure the opening of the abscess is large enough and the gutter is well-filled, and follow what you can according to your ability; and do not block the artery, and come forth with blood if the patient dies from the evacuation of blood and moisture.
de reume	of the patient.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is no disease called "cataract" that affects the eyes or the piss, and the disease is ancient, and the cure with medicine does not help, then it is treated with cauterization if it covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary, can you see the eyes, that the patient makes a cut; then the surgeon should rub the leg with a rough cloth as much as possible to open the arteries, then hold the cloth with both hands at all parts; then look if the blood comes out, and the blood from both sides are after the ears, and soon they are responded; then sign the legs, then press one and the other with a sharp spatula of II part, as much as the size comes to the bone, and that is by the wide chief.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, cut the spatula off the artery and press on the other side, cutting as much as possible, like this:
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is pricked, it continues to bleed without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open at the touch, it is necessary to measure the amount of blood that comes out, which should be about three drops; then, if there is a need to stop the bleeding, put a bandage on it and leave it for a while, then look at the wound: if the blood continues to flow from the bone without stopping, then tighten the bandage again and leave it, and take care of the wound with antiseptic until it is healed.
de emigrainne	The first sentence to translate is "de emigrainne
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When emigrainne occurs, and the face becomes pale, due to moisture from tears and sweat on the temples, and sometimes other things, it is treated with medicine in the ways of medical cures and all that does not benefit it, if we strangulate the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them if the patient has many hairs on his temples, and understands the artery that is opened in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is quickly replanted rather than in any man who is too foolish; and if it is replanted, then grip the man's neck with the patient's own hair, then rub the neck with some rough hair, and wet the neck with hot water until the artery opens clearly; then take the spatula of this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly burn the light leather until you reach the artery, then tear it up at the top with pincers, and remove as many strips as possible from each part; and if the artery is subtle, and the turn is at the tip of the uncinate bone, then the cope of that part follows according to the number of II chiés.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not coated, then it will not be able to move at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And tear out the blood in six parts, and if it is large, then it will be necessary to lay it in two parts of a strong silk thread, so that nothing comes before the wound, and comes undone; then cut off the excess between the two thirds at that time, and then, if you see, if the cauterization is hot enough to burn the bone as much as possible, and the chiés are coated; and this is the best way, if the malaide has no fever and is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterization is help to finish the moisture: for it is of greater help to the moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For it is necessary to extract the arteries with a soft cloth wrapped around the limb and securely tied; and if you loosen it, be sure to use dry medicines that make the blood coagulate and bandages as long as possible; and if there is no clotting of the artery, or if you use your legs of glass and pull on it with your hand until it is frozen, and if you don't have this present, then place your leg as far as it can be without freezing, and wet it with cold water as often as possible, and keep it stretched as much as possible; and what is most difficult and lightest in extracting the artery is to cauterize the vein of this cautery trenchant from the second part, but the trenching should be well spaced to last longer for the shock.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the wound is too deep, it holds less blood.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two cuts, as much as possible, the size of a pea, and when you see the two holes filled with blood, heat them until they glow red, and touch the vein in the two holes; and let them be far apart at the two ends because it is not good to have this cauterization all over; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are dripping from the veins that are seen as the main artery of fire, and it does not benefit at all from medicine, and you see the face of the patient wheezing, and smells like the front of a fever; and if they are thin and moist so that the paper seems to be cut, and the papers are shriveled, and charred by the heat of the tears, if it is suitable for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	1. And it was called the ancient "curative cut" and that you should make a gauze with the patient who has this disease, then I made three incisions or frontally according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions is like the other on the other side of the front, and the others are the costals through the papers, and keep away from the incision of the arteries that are through the papers; and separate your hand from the continuation of the mandibles, and each wound is the quantity of three to the traverse joints; and you have appeared a piece of sponge and moisten the drapes for the sanc to exude, then cut the spatula of two parts of coi is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	1. From the incision that is made in the temple to the second incision; and scorch all that is between the two fingers of the entire facial bone that is exposed to the bone, then make another part of the third incision to the other second, and then extract this spatulum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	2. If the tool called "cultellary" is used to bite in the first finger, and it is very sharp on one side but very blunt on the other, do not make it too sharp, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	3. And place the cutting edge of the saw towards the bone and the costeit towards the knuckle, and the bite as much as it comes to the second finger.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And cut off all the veins that are descending from the wound as much as the incision continues until it is completely open, and then another part makes the other end fend itself; and then draw out the blood evenly, and express the leeward for the blood taken; then put a piece of soft cotton in each fendure, and wrap them with flax brushed in wine and oil and vinegar, and keep the wound from drying up; and after that, take off the linen, and apply great amounts of cold thistle tea, then the cure of balsamic ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds as long as it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	1. It commands the patient to let their hair grow long and even for the
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	2. If no fire cauterization is customary, and you see the hairs thin and short, and the eye wavering, and the papers burned; and the head hurts, and the malady grows worse, and the patient suffers from these accidents that these materials and this cauterization only cause many wounds, and the cure that it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	3. And you command the patient to let you shave his head, then make a deep cut along the edge of his head, and another wide one inside.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	The text begins with the burning of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision on the bone; then move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move in the ear; when the bone is exposed, if all the blood comes out, and then put between the two lips of the burn and put cotton on it, and sew with linen; then sew with soft threads of wine and oil, and keep away from infection; when it is healed, if you have to rub the bone as much as charcoal and begin to pain, then the treatment of things that excite, which cause char, follow.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In the same manner: take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of linen thread, and make a paste; and apply this to these wounds for healing.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the earache
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that causes pain in the ears is one of four things: grains, bees, mines, or similar things like that; or seeds, like jaisses, feves, pois; or things that flow like fever and ague and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When the ear pains in the ear or in any other way than it does not fit well with the ear, and does not grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the wound, and it does not distill any drop of violet or thread oil, then perform extraction; I make the condiement, and it smokes the nostrils as it is extracted, and put the ear with pieces of linen or wool; and the ear remains in place.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	This remedy is used many times; and if it does not work, then perform extraction with fine tweezers, as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the tweezers, it is good; if not, then perform extraction with a small forceps and a double loop; and if it does not jump out, then make a gouge in the bone and bite off the end of the thread or ear hole, and smoke it that it does not enter through the candle wax when it comes, and then take form again, as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, then take some lint and put it in the ear; then press the gouge with the tweezers or something else, and take form again.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she does not jump from all these things that we have said, if you continue to hit the ear even though it is swollen and spasms, and the manner of hitting if it is that you first clean the ear with the physician's scalpel according to its strength, then hold the ear between your hands and turn the ear towards the opposite side and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the grease or where it hangs; and let the cut be as full as you go to the hole, then the bone according to your power, and the saliva drips into your mouth; and the cure as soon as it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is gravel that is in and it flows, then apply the extraction; and if it cannot be excreted, then administer this solution subtly according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that gravel.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not force it if you think the gravel is moist from the moisture in the ear, as many pieces as you can; then extract it with gentle pliers and saliva, as we have said, if the extractions are successful.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear, therefore, if the gravel is in the ear, then the surgeon should use a soft excision and enlarge the ear with fluffy cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let there be caution with that same ear or the eye.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps for this reason, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	And if it does not jump for this reason, then take many piercings according to the length of your wound and lightness, and burn them slightly with fire; and put the scalpel in your ear, and withdraw from there a little; and make another piercing on another part of your ear, and fierce on another piercing that is in the ear; and continue this until the wound is all out, and it jumps all out; and if you see, if it jumps, and catch one of the ends in the ear, and the other end take with fire as much as the more painful one is; then make another part of other piercings as much as the wound is all out, until the wound is all out, as we have said in the ear.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the breast, if it is small in size, similar to a pea and resembles something else, it is treated in the same way as we have described in the division; but if it is large in size, one can feel it during the extraction of forceps; and this is the lighter thing to be operated on that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the removal of the ears' tumors, if you treat it as we have described in the division and use distillations, but the cure does not benefit, then look at the ear with the sun: if there are no holes, if you use fine forceps, and if there are none, then take the rope of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be tight and wide around.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And pull on the ear more gently according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then gradually form a knot; do this often as often as it is needed.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, if the thread slips too far into the cotton glove as I have said in the incision; and if it does not enter deeply as we have said, apply distillations that the old ones have used in the decision of the verse, and you will find them or treat with oils and medicines in the ear at this instrument; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	1. And let either silver or gold be boiled in the pierced holes, and then strained through a fine sieve; and to press the distillation into a well-made silver instrument, and see if you have a lancet and enfold it at the point of the needle; then let it drip your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the vein, and the vein is in the ear; then dip the lancet into all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or runs from the ear; and it will feel the patient's pain, and so is the distillation in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, as the medicine will not be good if too cold.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the ear's chill
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without having a cold in the ears; and this very thing happens due to a chill or from being exposed to cold air, and there is no cold ever felt in the ear unless it can be seen; and there has never been any sign of a cold, and it is well seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes on suddenly, if it cannot be seen, is a sign of serious illness in many cases, and in those cases it is necessary to put the ear with the cold in the sun; and look: if you see the formation of pustules, then the ear has completely this swelling of cotton wool, which is the form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And so let the ear be cleaned and scratched all around, if it does not hurt the ear; if the dandruff is from the hair or the ear, if the fingers are gentle and the glove lightly, as long as the hair is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the dandruff is fully removed from the ear, if I use a gentle and light razor and slightly warm it, then I put on a feather from the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the dandruff that the patient feels is gritty in the ear, gently remove it, and do not hurt the ear nerves; then put a tent according to the large pore of the ear, and apply Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For as long as the wound is not soothing, or you take a tent and moisten it with clear rose water, and powder it with vitrol broiled; and if you see the ear closing, then cover the tent and move another soft tent made of olive oil and wax that covers the wound until it closes. Then, when it is healthy, the cure can begin.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the blood flows out, then dip a sponge and wet it with cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the flow of blood which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the parchment's folds
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	That which is the thickest that comes from papers when the hairs are moist and dry, if it happens that you extend them with needles and tweezers, and the cope of a spatula of its roots; then put on the limb vitreous broth.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without decortication, if the cautery is a subtle cautery, and the cauterizer after incision is sufficient; and they are often repaired, no thing is worn out from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, if the roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the grisely
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come in papers from the hairs things that seem gritty in their form and hardness, and for this is this disease called "grizzled" and it is an assembly of moisture large in the paper of it and out; the dislocations are such: take care if the grizzled is quiet on both sides, and it is light to know; then make it wide, then scrape each lightly, then take with pincers, and close.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not close it with care, it may tear the paper and cause pain to the patient; and if the assembly is large, it should be sewn at one seam, and cured as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, it should not be forced, because it may restore the rest too much and make it uneven.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	1. If the snowball descends towards the ear and reaches the inner part, and if you turn the paper upside down, and pinch the snowball with tweezers, and press the paper from both sides; and if you move the paper away with the incision, it causes no harm; and when the snowball is pinned, lift the oil of salty vinegar, and cure the lip that has turned as white as the malady so long as the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	2. of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	3. Exinach is a grease that stains paper, and this happens more in children, and causes pain to their hairs, and they come to the cathouse in the mornings, and cannot look at the sun's light because their tears fall on their hairs; and for this they lie down with their faces turned away, and sleep, and their papers become soaked in their wetness that the exinach penetrates into the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the joint with your hand and feel the excruciating pain within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the wound if it is that the patient places his head in your hand; then take a cloth from linen, and make a tent according to the quantity of pain each part contains, then place it over the wound; and press with your two hands on either side, so that the pain is assembled within the circle; then make a shelter of moisture at the incision, cutting a large, sharp edge, and not more than the size of the wound you made in the flesh; and make the cloth as large as you can see the pain; and in other ways, the pain comes from the cut, according to the shape of a greasy, white lump.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	1. Pull the thread through all a piece of cloth between your two hands, and turn your right and left hands as much as they spread; and make sure you do not pull in the fringes, that you do not go to any part of the suture, that you do not hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	2. If the thread does not open at the beginning of the fringe, then lightly open it when it appears; then pull it as we have said, and then smooth out the drapery with your hands and put it on the shoulder, and hold it tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	3. And if such men who bribe seal and put on to corrupt the moisture which is dried out.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure, as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient comes to the abscess with gangrene, if the cure uses drying substances as long as he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of paper fibers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper fibers are grown artificially other than nature, and are woven, if they harm the eyes, and cause diseases such as tears and mucus of paper and albugine, until it is caused by the destruction of the hairs; and the cure follows four methods: either by burning together with fire, or by medicine according to what is in front of or in the chapter of cauterization, and is made by cutting and stitching or by pins, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient's arm in your mouth, then turn the paper around in your left hand; if it turns, it is good; if not, then insert an awl into all the threads of the filament; and let the edge of the paper or the hair grow from the edges of these hairs, and pull the thread through all the paper, turning it at the raseur; then cut off the part of the paper that is loose, adjusting the hairs evenly, all around the wound, from the largest to the smallest; then withdraw the thread, and put a small piece of cloth and fabric on the paper, then sew a figure on the paper as if it were the bow of a ship, like the fiddle of a mirror, and then it should be according to the quantity that you see rising the paper that is described as such.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If a part of the body that requires treatment has a large amount of paper according to its condition, then take all the threads from the lines you have written, and begin with the largest loop as possible; and so one of the fringes near the natural hair growth in lengthening of a root, then pull out the hair at that angle, then scrape it off completely; then sew the two lips together at an eyelet of a fine thread, and draw out the suture, and make air to the superfluity of threads at the two corners of anything gluant, if you see this done; and if not, then leave the stitch and the threads until three or four; then cure the wound with the stitch of things that are dry and constricting, for the paper relaxes from the pain of the wound and its assembly, but the stitch is dead (as they say the ancients), and it is over for good if not done another way: and if another way: then see the paper as a figure that is as large as the fur of the marten, as we have seen, at three o'clock in the evening according to this form:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then come those who overpower with equal force according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	Then come those who overpower with equal force according to the form that is here: If you cannot hold the nails, and the thing is not even, then take a needle or a thread, and pull it through; and take another thread of about the same length as the great one, and the small one, and assemble them between your two hands correctly; then gently press with your hand, and gently sew all the edges where you have sutured, and treat the wound as much as possible; and if an abscess comes to your incision, so that it is relieved by cerotte and semblance of pain; and never once has the hair of the paper been converted: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The patient with rabies is treated as follows: and you will convert the paper according to this form, and then make the snakes according to what I have said, and they are tied as tightly as the paper and the threads are long; and cope as the heads of the parts you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly over the paper of the oil, and draw the snakes from the formed parts; and leave no others, and the leather that is stretched will die and turn black and rot, as long as it is on it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, if the force is too great, then the treatment will be as follows: and when the wound is healed and the paper is lifted, and no more hair will be tied; and this is the form of the snakes you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	1. The first step is to make an incision as small as possible with a fine needle, and then thread a thin silk filament; then assemble the ends gently and make sure they are even; then cut the other silk filament as short as possible, and tie off the ends; then place the patient's head in your hand; and if the dislocation is not corrected, it may be due to the subtlety of the incision and the filaments; then cut all the filaments at the root of the hair, and trace them on paper as you pull out the natural hair; then pull out the hair until you reach the end of the filament, and cut it if there is one or two or three or more; then pull out your hand as the hair comes out with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	When the fur is shaved, it is treated and the hairs do not grow back with it, if you are careful with the shaving and do not pull the hair too hard, until the fur comes out in patches and you see it through the oil; then if you pull the hair and leave the oil alone for two or three days, and the fur grows back in its place and the hair is pulled out, and if the fur is short, it is accompanied by one long hair from the cheekbones, and it is cut with that which you leave it, until it is elongated and then it is tied.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the oil's fat
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or oil comes, it happens in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes from wounds, or cuts, or burns, and in similar ways.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to heal it is to cut out the sore, and cleanse the lips, and put on lint, and leave it as long as it remains healthy; and nothing else is needed in the cure of it for things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease may become worse than the first; but it works things that are softening, like fenugreek; and the rose of Aquafia or Althea and the linen seed, when cooked and mixed with no oil at all, and wrapped in a cloth, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are if you guard that it does not sound like according to the form it was before; and these diseases that we have said are none other than relapses of this disease, unless it revives according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the char that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is called "Axcacritis" truly is called "Axcacritis", and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounding and burning and cauterization and things similar; and the sign of the cure in the patient is if you prick with an awl, if it has two threads, and the char in the oil, and it seems clearer on the left side than on the right, so that the threads come in the head of the char; then the char is at rest for all the awl, and the cord is in the large spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if the paper is misaligned, it should be returned to its original position; otherwise, take a ruler and place it in the fold, and make two folds or cut the paper at the edges of the incision you made; then, make sure the angles are aligned so that the figure resembles a letter without the Greek letter "I"; then, adjust the corners according to the amount of fabric used, which is equal to the size of the paper, and tie them with a linen thread; then, apply the remedies we have mentioned for mollifying medicines and plasters, as long as the wound is healing.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	When the disease comes from frost or cold or burn, if it comes that you cut a flat piece of paper to remove the hairs from the papers, and according to what is before; then draw between the two legs of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the form of the disease, for it is different in shape, and the skilled masters arrange everything according to what comes back to its natural figure; and the patient himself, according to what is needed for the cut and excision in other positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	I should have used paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this cauterization comes into the hands of women in such a way that the paper on it is soaked with white of oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it comes to pass that you cut the point of a razor with the wet paper, and lift it up; and the tweezers are used, as long as you touch what is stuck in the subtle spumona, which is neither too much nor too little, so that the patient can endure either the spumona too much or the oil bleeding; and your incision, which you scrape of that assembled one, lightly, so that the paper reforms according to its natural form; and it becomes healthy for all assembled, and never causes any harm in the sharp oil, and raises it to the sweet oil, and to the hot iron; then put a piece of lin between the paper and the oil, and put on the oil fine flax in an abundance of urine; and afterwards use the collar and other things as long as it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the bone of the elbow
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways in which the bone of the elbow can be: it is nerveless and resembles hard flesh, but another that is not nerveless, but resembles dry, moistened cheese, which when touched with iron and heated causes pain, if it does not; and both resemble this towards the great armor, and grow little by little as it covers all the sight and light and movement of the bone.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision if the patient puts his head in the knife, then he operates on the bone; and soften the paper with your hand, then take the bone with small pincers, and hold it at the end; then take a needle, and insert the horsehair, or the horsehair, or the beef hair, and the strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and the thread enters the bone, and perforate all the needle, and tie the bone with a string and hold it at the end, and scrape all the hair that covers the costeit of the bone which has the prunes and the silk at the chief, then cut off the remaining in the root of the arm at all the subtle and slight forces, and leave the natural or the wound, so that by the incision there comes no tears to the usual; and never has the bone stayed in the skin only, and along, as we have said; then scrape all the spatumile is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And make sure the shaving does not touch the rough skin and break it, and that the pruning is not seen; and after the incision, grease a little of the wool with olive oil, and let it stay overnight; then the care for what must be done until it is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	1. And if the nail is not nervous, and you do not thrust the needle, and the unguis cannot enter, it is often treated with this appearance of a nail of medicines; and I have seen many times in the division, and if you see it coated, then use olive oil on the light shaving according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	1. And carefully cut the finger, and if you see that it does not become soft and the nail presses in, then distill from your mouth into the oil made of lavender and red collie and clover, and it stops the oil from flowing to the other part; then continue the other incision according to this same work, as long as it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. If nothing is against you in the oil, like a poultice, then apply the poultice and first cure the poultice until it is healthy, then continue the incision as before, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the flesh of the arm appears in the oil at night due to great exertion, and a part of it is not completely affected, and tears do not appear; then it distills into the oil that is red and charcoal-like, which is made by combustion.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the charred wood that was burned
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men have never burned any red charcoal, and they cut the prunel and roll it on papers and tie them together to make a rose of balsam; and if the wound is such that the surgeon places his finger in the patient's mouth, then he cuts the wounds, and takes all the charred wood as possible, and holds it with the force of the hand; then cut the first piece, and take all of it to the razor as close to the end as possible, and make sure that you do not let the oil get into the wound; and the incision is like the one we have said in the incision of the finger and with small forces of coi on the bone, if it forms after this chapter as we have shown; and when the incision is completed and all the char is removed, if you use oil of silk or distilled red charcoal and medicines corrosive, and put it over the oil with a pad of linen, so that it is assured of apotheme chaut; and if it does not cost anything, and the without chaus comes down on you, and you doubt apotheme chaut, if you leave the oil and cure apotheme chaut with things apaisant apotheme chaut; then return to your wound as soon as it is healthy, and then make many charred pieces in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you heal the care of every weak vein of nature; and of the accidental vein, in fire; and do not thrust your hand into any of these wounds as long as you see that the other limb is in pain of this wound.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If there are red veins that are covered with oil, and they touch the eye and cause pain in all parts.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the first thing you should look at is the oil that is present, and if it is red, it is likely that there is no other disease but the oil; therefore, in this way: instruct the patient to place his head on your shoulder, then pull out those veins all over the body according to his wisdom, and let the subtle veins be double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be three types of cuts according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then use your fingers to remove the finer hairs subtly, and let the blood flow afterwards as much as you can see the hairs coming out of the skin; and do not cut the skin with sharp points of the razor blades, and do this operation in the middle of the day before the sun, and be very careful in your operation so that you do not cut the skin more than the hairs; and when you have finished, distill the greener and redder oil into it to corrupt what is coming out of the skin.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot bear to endure all of this in that hour, then apply a plaster on the oil of things that calm the pain of the head, and leave it for as long as the pain is calmed and secured from further injury, then resume according to this manner until it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the ointment fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The fistula is called an "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with a cautery and according to the medicine of burning heat as I have previously described, and it is not well healed, then it must be closed, and all the moisture that is in it must be drained until the wound is discovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and darkness, if all the instruments of this kind are not made of one form; then it is called "sharp chief," and should be made firm in the chief, and should not be pointed like a knife as it is in its present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the head of the corrupt bone, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand as much as you can to ensure that this corruption is removed; and do this as few times as possible, then restore the bone with medicated extricants.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is seen, and it is hard, and the belly of the bowel is seen, and remains for forty years, and it does not renovate nor become apostatic, and accidents do not occur, then you should be sure that it is healthy; if not, then there is no other engine than to bring the fistula to the neck of the uterus according to this form: and then you should cut through the bone twice by stone and by medicated agues, and when the bone is exposed if it pierces according to this form, and the head of the iron is at third angle, and the fistula is at first angle if you see it so:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	1. Then place the forceps on the bone of the arm, and gently move your hand away from the oil I pocket, then turn it completely until it pierces the bone and feels the pain as if you are holding your hand above your neck; and then restore the dry medicine leg, as I have shown you, and when the char is made and hardened by the neck, if the matter is at the neck, then it is a lighter thing for the malaide.
de l’issue de l’oil	2. of the issue of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	3. When the wound is fully opened and there is no drainage from the bladder, and the malaide does not become inflamed or swollen, then you must tell the malaide; then close the wound, then put on ventouses or haterel without hurting with sugar, then put on the oil made of acake, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle, and then strain the oil, and apply it to the bandages and drapelz; if the drapelz are too wet, double each one for IV, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the malaide has used; then strain the oil into bands of a hard bendeil, and resume the ventouses without hurting with sugar; then loosen the ventouses and let the oil be strained all night and the next day, and if it is tightened, then you can tighten the liiens amolist; if not, then after the day and the nut, if you see the oil repaired, it is good; if not, then resume the application and the drapelz and the liiens amolist and the ventouses as long as it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Great shock to the eyelid
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a shock comes to the eyelid, it opens wide and produces papers as if they were resin grains, and it is difficult to see; therefore, cover your eyes, the lid is such that you can insert an awl at the root of the part where the eye socket ends, then insert another awl where the double thread of the eyelid is; and perceive, and leave the first awl according to its position; then cut off the double thread and take a part of the eyelid with it, and pull it firmly, then remove the awl and put some ointment on a soft cloth in abundance on the wound; and leave it as long as the threads cling to the eyelid, then cure the wound with comforting things until the wound is healed; and never leave the wound uncovered by the eyelid part of a circle of cloth as soon as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the hairs grow too long, then prick them at their base with a sharp needle that comes from the oil, and remove the moisture and descend the hairs, and then pull as much as it is possible to make it safe.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the oil's bowl
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not more than bowls assembled in the oil, appearing as sharp; and this sharpness is not sharp; and the appearance of the dislocation if you make it so that the patient lies on his side and right side, then take the chief between your hands of II parts, and pull as much as you see the bowl coming to the desus at your hairs; then it should be straight, and the bowl should be clean of the light, and see the patient's things as he was; and if it does not descend, say that it is sharp, and if the bowl descends from the dislocation is not assembled as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you place the patient's hand in yours, then take a small sponge and wet it with warm water mixed with honey or fenugreek syrup, and continue to moisten until the bow is empty; and when it comes out, let it drip into the warm water mixed with honey or fenugreek syrup, and then treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the appearances of the waters in the division, and when it is necessary to perceive; if according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	1. It is necessary that you place the oil between your hands crossed, being in the light of the sun, and let the healthy and tight oil be well mixed; then put the paper of the oil on your left hand so that the hairs are in order, or on your right hand so that the hairs are disordered; then take with your right hand, if the hairs are in order, the instrument called "almagda," or with your left hand if the hairs are disordered; then place the point of the instrument at the edge of the crown through the hair of the oil at the smallest part of the crown, and gently push the instrument called "almagda" with the right hand until it pierces the hair of the oil and feels that almagda is entering the empty space; and it is necessary that the measurement of the almagda hole be at the front of the measurement of the espaice which is at the end of the nose; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal edge, then put the instrument in the eye where it belongs, and press the hole afterwards with another one.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If it is inflamed now, if he sees the physician before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, if it becomes inflamed again, open the second vein with the instrument, and when the furrow is clear and it does not move, gently twist your hand around it a few times; then place a warm wet cloth on the area, and wipe away the oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put on a thin layer of ointment made from oil, rosewater, and an excess of oil, and apply it with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and we who are of our kin, put on a layer of bread with an excess of oil.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the thread cannot enter the hole because of its hardness, since it has too hard hairs, then you must use an instrument called "alderet" which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And perforate only the conjunctive, and do not cut too much, but make a subtle hole, then insert the thread, as we have said; and at the end of the work, it should be placed in the patient's eye, and it should lie on its side, and it should not move to the right or left, and it should be placed according to its own position; then it is removed from this dark room, and the eyes are closed, and it is shown to see any things, and then it is placed back in the patient's eye after nine days; and it is only necessary to do this in the eye of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary to remove it because the wound becomes inflamed too quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When the dislocation occurs, move your hand in front of the seventh ribs, and address the one who relieves the dislocation; and when you are calmed, remove the eye and put it on your face or cheek to cover any rib, and be careful in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house quickly and convert into your case; and be careful that no disciple should intermarry in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And some came from the Yrach who told us that in some places it was made for some reason, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever heard of it in old books; and by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of the cauterization, because those who do not know them well; and they should be properly made:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of this matter be made as subtle as possible, and the tail in three angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the cloth with the needle.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No cloths ever come out or are torn in different ways, and if there are any that seem like scorpions at the mouth of piers; and if it is such or has a char enchanced with fuxe color, and if it is a char souef of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case of those cloths that are souef and not enchanced, it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands facing the sun; and operate on its nostrils, and grease the nails on those cloths, and tear them off; for if you do not hold them steady at the subtle spumous tip of one part, as long as you feel that the char is all dry.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If there is nothing else that can be done, and you apply all the straights subtly and lightly, if it does not cause any harm; and if it is not too late, or if the wound is large, so that it does not become infected and all the bones are not affected, then cauterize as much as possible and make it stop bleeding until it is no longer oozing and becomes red and inflamed or wet with wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the wound is not cauterized and moisture comes to the palace, it is a sign of health; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, it means that the bone has been charred in the bone, or that the straights cannot be cut: therefore, it is necessary to tie the end of a piece of linen around it, and make sure that each hand is tied with the thread, and it must be no more than three times the length of the finger; then put the thread through the mouth of the wound, and take it out when it comes out through the nose; and often do this to the child as he grows, and it is a light thing for those who see it; then hold the end that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other hand with the mouth that comes through the mouth, and tie them one after the other as we do with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	1. Until you perceive that the child has corrupted the char, then cut off the boy's penis, cleanse the wound, and moisten the boy's penis with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the urethra as before; do this three times or more, until the ointment corrodes all that is left of the char; then place a catheter of platinum some years until it is healthy, and if he has skill in drying herbs, then use it; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the child's head, or when one distills the oils and herbs or medicines.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or gold, resembling a hanging lamp, like a candle, and lead it thusly; and if you see, if I make a candle closed, and let the extremity be plain to expel the grease; and have a hand to hold the head while heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	and of the char for the needle.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times the head of the needle causes a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large, until it is visible to look at; therefore, it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and all of it, then put the cautery or the burning medicine; and if you delay as long as it is large, if it is hard, of a dark color, poor sense: if it does not touch any iron, because it is enchanted, because when you cut it never, if evil comes to the patient; and if the enchantment is on the point, not of dark color, and you see that you can cover it, if you look at the patient and the point without pain, and cure the patient of things that are scarce and restricting.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the dislocation is noticed and reduced
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is said that when one of these cartilages continues to cause pain, it is rarely found in any man.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore to look if the wound is fresh at all its base; and then apply two leeches, one after the other, until it is healthy; and if the leeches have drained all the parts of the wound as they become healthy, then assemble the two leeches on a piece of lint or another suitable gauze, and tighten it, and powder it with dragon's blood, and incense it; and then place a piece of the powder on a plaster or another suitable plaster, and leave it until it dries, and then treat the wound as needed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the sewing is as follows: if you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the speech of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	The lips of the speech are often hard and rough, like grains of sand, and smaller and larger; therefore, it is necessary to turn the lips, and every time you take a new piece, and hold them with tweezers and pull each part; then use the lee after the incision of vitriol, as long as it is not stained; and then the lee of the sand, and cure the lee of things dry as long as it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	The first sentence to translate is "de la char des gencives". The
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the char of the girdles is displaced, which is called "albulus"; if you can hold it with your fingers, and the cloth at its root, and leave alone the bow or the sinew; then put on the leather vitriol powder, or other drying and desiccating powders; and if the char returns after the incision, and many times it does, if the cloth second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the estrumens for copes.
des sordens	The second sentence to translate is "des sord
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	1. No times are assembled at the jaw's end, where the mouth is between the cheeks, harsh and rough ones; and no times is the black and yellow and pointed tooth, as long as corruption comes to the cheek, and it becomes the pointed tooth; if you want to put the tooth between your hands, and its ends are in your holy place, and open the jaws or the harsh ones as long as it does nothing; and then I make black and green, and yellow and other stains, as long as they are turned; and if this is in the first reason, it's good; but if not, then resume in the second day and tooth, as long as you have everything turned; and note that the teeth have different forms of estructions to laugh, according to what the demonstration shows, because the raser that razes the teeth has other forms than those that are shown between the teeth; and these forms and others are with you equipped.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the patient's tooth pain that you delay and do not hurry, because it should not be done; for it is a substance of high value, therefore there is no excuse for haste.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	When the patient is confined to bed, it is necessary that you be certain of their toothache.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain of the patient has passed, and it is necessary that you make sure the tooth is healthy, and drink the mouth rinse; and it will not disappear completely because the patient is still in pain, as long as the tooth is drawn, for we have already wanted to do this for these healthier ones; and when you are certain of the toothache, if you must scrape the tooth all over the gum until you reach the root of all parts; then take your needle or small tweezers in your healthy hand, and place them well so that they are well inserted, and then confirm the tweezers; and make sure the patient's tooth is well in your healthy hand, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the broken tooth with care, and if it does not break, then take none of these forceps and gently pull out each piece from any part, and move it as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the teeth are felt and extracted, then it is necessary that you fill them with cloth; and if the extraction is done gently with tweezers, which does not break the tooth; and it is wise to overturn the genitals to clean the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be well advised that you do not break it, and there remains a part, and the patient should return to the physician due to the greater pain of the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	1. And make sure you do not harm yourself by following the ignorant practices of those who, with their haste and hardiness, break through the chariot again and again, but never cause any harm to the patient that we have counted; but they bring the patient only once by the agony of this great disease, either due to the roots that they cut, or due to the chariot that they break, just as often as we have wanted; and when the wound is sore, wash the limb with wine or vinegar and salt; and if the dislocation comes, which often happens, if you use vitriol, then it often comes, if you cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the stummers, or the first teeth, are long and wide and thick at the ends, so they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of large members if they do not bend when pulled, and they should be made of good iron, and they should have sharp edges to hold.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root of the tooth is pulled out, if you must put your thumb on the gum soft and wet with barley meal for an hour or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the root is smoothed, pull out the points called "algefri," even if the head seems like a beak of care; and they should be made in the same way as a lime and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of all these pricks, then it comes that you dig the wound all the way to the root, and insert the instrument called "althali", which is a type of palantine, and its shape is as follows:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be large and thick if it does not break the skin, and if the root jumps from this, it is good; if not, then you can use all the instruments, depending on the shapes that come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you need to use this instrument with two rains, then its shape is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front in the reason of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like large thorns, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	1. And let it be known that it cannot be broken, and sharp-edged like those of teeth; and others as well, which are not so hard; and the saws most skilled use their own instruments, according to what their work and the disease they demonstrate, for some diseases have no instruments taught by the diversity of bones and hands, or break not due to charred or other bones, or they perforate, if it seeks estruments as I said, and aids with gestures, according to the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	2. And let the bone be large and well held in place, so it does not break, but can hold and set; and then restore the body of medicines suitable to this, and if there is any pus in the bone, and it is small, then all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears to not fit naturally in the mouth, and it is malformed, and similarly in women, if it is necessary to remove it after the tooth, and it is not correct in place, and it cannot be sewn or woven: therefore, the root; and if it is pulled out with the tooth, if it takes this instrument whose form is like the small bite, and should be sharp and hard in the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the grip is small and small in the hands due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be sewn, then it can be sewn, if the ligature of this part is like the form of this instrument:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	The patient should gently lift the beak with their fingers, as little as possible, until it does not move; then, the end should be flat and have no sharp edges, and the tongue should not be broken or the speech corrupted, if the sharp part is even and does not cause the tongue to break or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the beak is lifted.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the beak is lifted by pressure or with forceps, and the patient cannot press on it as they should, and you should treat them with restricting medicines, and that is enough; if they need to be restrained by a golden thread, because the silver threads turn green and putrid, but the gold does not become loose; and the thread should not be too thick or too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the bad teeth, as long as you see sensibility in the healthy tooth on the other side; then resume the covering where you left off, and gently and carefully move your hand until it does not move; and if the root of the tooth is accessible, so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then the head of the shoulder is pierced with nails, and they are assembled, and placed between the healthy teeth, and it is put on so that it does not break the tongue; and then it is left as narrow as possible, and if it remains, or the string comes off, if it is tightened by another string; if it remains and serves for all its teeth, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the incisors of the two healthy teeth and the two canines, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is set, if it is reset in its place, again and again, as we have said; and it does not come out squeezed and painful, and never made into a bone-like tooth of a mare, and it is put back in its place or where it failed, and it is tightened as we have said, and it remains and serves for all its teeth.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Of the copper wire of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No time is the tongue that comes out of the mouth or nature, which is not needed; or by accident of a wound; and the tongue is such that you can open the mouth of the patient, and put his tongue in his mouth, and loosen the tongue; then cut off the nerve as wide as the tongue is displaced from its place, and if it is hard or swollen, and it is due to pain, if the tooth pains, and cut off large on the same side; and make sure the knife does not cut too much, for the artery that is out of place; and when you have done it, if the gum is red and sore, or cold, then put the tongue in a linen tent; and the patient should be tinctured with the saliva every night, so that the patient's mouth does not become dry.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the dislocation occurs again, if it is not set correctly, then the limb is wasted and the cauterization at the slow cauterizing iron, which is boiled in this way; then the treatment of another treatment until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is not seen as red or black or hard, if the patient does not feel it, if it is not touched, because it is gangrene; and if it is declining into a blenchor, and it has moisture, if it oozes pus, and it forms a subtle spumous mass, and it delivers from one part and another; and if the limb is not set in its place, if it is set with vitreol broth as much as possible, then return to your place as you trace all the force; then lift the limb from the hip and the ankle, and the treatment of other treatments until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of the mouth's abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Never comes to the mouth's abscesses called "godath," and they are properly the second mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, then keep guard: if they are dislocations of hard matter and color, and not touching metal with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, and not touching metal with iron, then for the evacuation of blood; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will remove it; and if it is a black color with a subtle root, and you have prepared the instrument with copper, but first look at whether the dislocations are quiet and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	1. Therefore, make the patient face the sun, and ensure their head is in its proper position. Then, open their mouth and place the tongue between their fingers, and press the entire instrument against the back of the throat, regardless of whether it is silver or gold, as some say:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	2. If you press the tongue against the entire instrument and see the abscess, then take the tweezers and the needle in the garden, and tear it as far as you can; and take no other thing from the tools, then place the instrument at the end, and it seems to have many forces; and all the parts are sharp, and one part is against another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or of gold:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, if you have needles, then the form is:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	Then, cut from one side and the other part; and when you have cut one of the hairs, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, heat the blade with hot, cold, and dry steam, and if the blood comes out, heat the blade with hot, cold, and dry steam, or if there are boils from ripe pomes cooked, or sores from marjoram, and similar things, until the blade is not stained; then treat it as it is healthy; and never have any other abscesses born in the mouth except the two hairs, if they are cut like the two hairs.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with a stomachache that was causing her to choke on food; it was a small-sense abscess. She had nearly closed the entire throat, so the woman could not breathe through the clogged channel that was swollen, and could neither drink nor eat, and she died if she delayed for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess was so large that it had been drained twice through the two incisions.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then removed the entire tumor, and found a large portion of bowel inside; I then removed another piece from the other incision, and pressed on the tongue; after removing the tumor from these abscesses, and taking a sample, only a small amount of pus came out; and then she was able to swallow water and wine, and continued to cut down on the abscess with each passing day; the abscess grew larger and filled the throat that I had sutured, so that it could not swallow anything large; therefore, I closed and cauterized the wound: afterwards, she did not improve; and I left these parts, and only God can do more after me.
de l’uve	Of the uterus
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the uterus is drawn towards the vagina, and it is long and thin, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is very large and round, it is called "uterus".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, you see that the abscess is calmed, and it is subtle, if you copulate; and the one that is round and not long is assembled and not long; and it is bloody or of a dark color or black, if you evacuate the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have said, of its chin and gums, that you should place the patient facing the sun, and press the lower lip on the instrument we made note of before; then look into the eye, and remove the teeth as we did in the incision of the two amandras.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, you will grieve the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two amandras, and cure it as soon as it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	If the patient is afraid of pain, then it is necessary that you use engine for the burning of the painful part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way to burn is sharp and quick.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient places his head on your hand, and then presses his tongue on the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter of burning, and confuses with sharp, live force; and with this use of the instrument, whether it is too thick or too clear, the form is:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has a hair or puts medicine in his mouth, as the medicine of a lancet, and inserts the instrument into all the medicine on the eyelid; and the patient is anxious on his chest, if the saliva and the gums are moist with the medicine given, if it does not reach the throat and the jaw, then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the eyelid, as much as you see the pain and the bitter taste of the medicine is calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and pull the instrument out of the cotton through the canal of the eye, as much as the cotton dries on the eyelid; and do this often until the burning is perfect, then leave it to dry, and after four or five hours, if you have skill in reapplying the medicine, if you reapply it, and after the burning of the medicine, wrap the exudate around the eye, with cotton, and clean what is outside the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured of gargles as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This remedy is safer than incision alone. If it is treated with fumigation in this way, take calamine, oak bark, sweet gale, chamomile, and rue, and all or some of these herbs in a pot, add water, and boil; and the mixture can be well glued with hard earth, and the pot should have the instrument made as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or gold, and one of the ends of the shoulder be put into the patient's mouth as much as the vapor rises up the urethra through the canal, as long as the urethra is closed; after which it often returns, as long as the urethra is dry, and make sure you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of gout attack, because many things come; and do not do this unless it is at the decline of gout attack.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a needle and put some wax in the corner of the mouth of the patient; for the wax in the mouth does not cause the vapor to grip the mouth, and it is good cure together salute.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened in the throat, either with a bone or a fish spine, or nothing at all; if it happens then you must see what you can see, and press the tongue against the instrument at every part of it, so that you see the thing; and if it does not open and is stuck in the throat, it is good to make the patient vomit unless the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it is helped by vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of gum, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and then dip it in the sponge and then glutinize it; and when it reaches the stomach, if it does not come out, and then draw it back; and if it does not come out of what we have said, then take the instrument of pluck according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	1. And let the forceps be placed at the opening if it can enter more lightly into the mouth, and have the head raised; and warn that you should not touch the epigastrium, as all will vie for it, nor should you crowd the bone; and it is best that the surgeon and the instrument are placed, because either may be misplaced; if it is misplaced, or if it is drawn further away from the instrument evenly, as far as it can be.
de la sansue de la gorge	2. of the throat of the mouth
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	3. No time is there for medicine when the throat is closed, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when it does not profit, then look at the mouth of the patient to the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the wound, if it has all its thin skin, or if there are small hairs that are worth saving.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it is not worth saving, then take a small hair, and bite in the mouth of the patient, then pull or cut off the hair, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And the patient's skin is itching all the time.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take plenty of cold water to see if the skin itches, and open the mouth, and the saliva feels itchy, and move it to your hand often; and if the wound also feels itchy, then do.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If she does not understand as we have said, if the patient smokes afectide, use the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the urethra; do this many times, as it will feel better.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of the fumigation if you think you have charcoal or if it has burned coals, and it is covered with a covering in the environment, and in the other end it is the head of the instrument; then your fumigation is ready, and the patient puts the end of the catheter in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not enter, but goes to the throat; and the throat will now hurt, and if it continues, repeat the fumigation many times; and suffer the doctor's thirst, and drink salty and bitter things, and do not drink any lemonade; and then you must endure this treatment as it was ordered.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument used to treat the wound, if it is, when it can be seen, resembles tinea corbes with needles to enter the mouth; it resembles the beak of a surgeon, and has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and thus the form is:
li chapistres des apostemes	The cautery of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The appearances of the abscesses are, according to what is remembered in this book, and they vary in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is in its own appearance itself, and for that it is moist.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method if by the wounds or when they are infected.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the wounds of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the wounds caused by the bone are different from those that come in joints, and each person has their own judgment in the matter.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if in the wounds we cannot see the bone, as long as the bowel is dead according to its completion; and if there are such cases where it is necessary to see the bone when it is thought to be dead, and they do not die according to their completion, like those that are dead from joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when wounds come from dead joints, and they are left as long as they are pricked, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, for this is due to contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	1. If the incision is deep into the limb, and you delay the piercing until it is mortally wounded, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is the foundation, if the hole is not made that it dies, then only the incision thought to have completed digestion can be made, for that which is the foundation, it will not burst, and it will be long-lasting, and a fistula will be formed; and it cannot heal in a great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	2. And it is necessary that you squeeze the wound of the incision made by the deadly wound according to the completion, and when the pain is eased, when the fever subsides, when the pain and bleeding are lessened, and when the debate and ague of the wound are lessened, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the wound or more dependent on the incision, and where it opens; and let the wound be long and not short, and if the wound is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all of them equal or without cavity.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these where pricked, according to the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is present in the body, if it is necessary to leave the puncture as long as it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you do not perceive before this, if the wound becomes long and painful from it, and is filled with feces; and by chance harden the lips and make them rough from it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no abscess that is felt according to the wide wound, according to which the member has experience.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you cut out small abscesses, small abcesses, and large ones according to their appearance in the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that they are cut off with a sharp edge, and closed; when they are become as hard as I am, and are closed, then it is necessary to make them as bubbles: and if there are such ones that are cut in three angles, and if there are such ones that are cut like the thorn of mirte, as abscesses of anger; and if there are such ones that a cut is made with a large size, and other sizes and appearances are closed.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	1. If a woman does not have a womb, if the grief is superficial as an abscess, it is necessary to loosen it slightly; and when the abscess is large, and has caused great pain, and it has moved much blood, and you loosen it, unless you drink all the blood in that hour, but only a part of it, then the grief subsides in the other day, then do not touch anything else, until the blood is all gone; at the same time, if the woman is weak in virtue, or a woman carries, or small children, or old men with decayed limbs.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expectations there is no once with the end of the bowels, that by chance died the patient, and you do not know it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived the abscess, if it is infected, look at the size of the wound; if it is a small one, then sew it with linen or cotton threads; if it is large and has suppuration, and there are several abscesses, then sew each one in a separate piece of cloth so that one can cover the other; if you have cut into a wound a part of leather, and you have shaved it off, then sew it with fine linen or rabbits’ hair, and line it with moist cloth or rags of linen, and sew the joint as soon as it is healthy. Then the bone, and the care of the dressing until it is cured.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	When the patient has fever, if it is cold and humid, and their skin is pale, and they often sweat, and they lie down on their side many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has fever, if they are well-governed and healthy, and they use the powders I mentioned in my hands from this book, and if they have diarrhea, and their stomach is nervous, then you should take warm baths and oils, and if it is like this, and the patient is anemic, then you should take cold baths and oils, or warm wine and oil, or if it is necessary, then you should treat the aposteme and the discharge, as it is appropriate, until they are healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	This comes when you need to understand the treatments for abscesses: or you have said how to go before the treatments for abscesses, and now this chapter.
des soros	of blood
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When the head comes to abscesses, and they are like us in appearance, as if it were a grapevine, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	It is thick and tender or wet, like poultry; and if it is tough and hard at the tailor's, and there is no doubt, then it will not work against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the measurements of the body if you measure all the instruments called "dislocating", whether the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they will make it longer than necessary.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is seen, it should not be left with the hair that contains it, because it will return as soon as it is left alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian wool, if it is present; otherwise, use linen and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and whatever is left over should be removed.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then continue the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the skin, until you are sure that it will not cause pain the next night; then treat the wound with ointment according to what is suitable, until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	When the graft holds, if the stitch follows this form, it will be long; and it will gnaw your bones, burn all parts, and put all your care into drawing the cheek or the lip; and if the artery is against it, I will do as I have said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And if I make the stitch when it is purulent, and cut and treat it as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cut is made around the purulent stitch when it is wetter, as it is lighter because there are few serums.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these stitches or heads have no moisture, and are not made by an old woman, but by me; and I find the stitch as a sharp, rough, bluish wound, which cannot be cut; and if none were made, it would have been as a cut as a piercing.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other cases or apostemes coming, let these who come for the children and roots of the ears open it as soon as possible to the most dependent part of the ear, to relieve the bow; and treat them according to what is necessary.
des scrophules	of scrophules
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times the aposteme comes to the neck, and removes the harnesses, and the girdles, and no other part is harmed, and they are tight, and they are joined with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrophule is properly made on its side, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrophules are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	It has to do with needles that contain moisture, and if they are from malicious people who do not want to follow the health rules.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	If it is in the bone socket that appears to be of good color, and is even all over and is not rough as nerves or arteries or veins, and is not porous; if you manage to cut through it, and burn it from each part, and the lips of the mouth are dry as onions, then you can do it, just as we have said in apostles; and the cut is small and small, and you are sure that you are not touching the nerve or the vein, and are not rough, that the hands are not chapped, and do not see too soon, that you do not cut more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you prick the vein or artery, and it does not let you stop, then put vitrol beeswax or any powders that remain sand in the wound, and tighten the wound; and leave it until the abscess is pacified and soothed the wound, and begin to dress it.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And if the wound is not healed, then return to your vein as soon as you have finished; then look at your sign if it does not produce any small scabs, if the cloth and the mud.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if the wound is a large scab, then it is only necessary to cut out that scab at its root, but leave it attached to a strong double thread, and let it hang without causing any harm; then apply the wound with soft cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and the cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cover the entire wound, then assemble the two lips of the wound, and cut now, as there is no excess due to the size of the wound.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you understand how to cover the root of it, and draw it out, and cut as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those wounds that have excess are perforated, either by making it larger or by opening; and it is done as we have described, with care and similar things, if it prevents corruption from spreading; and when the wound is properly dressed, if the dressing of ointment makes it heal faster, then it is healthy.
de squinance	Of the shoulder
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the shoulder's measurement; however, I have never seen anyone in our world do this, and this is the script of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with dislocated shoulders, it is necessary that the one who has had the operation, called 'epiglottis', be avoided; and this cannot be helped because all the wounds and the great pain of the patient are in those who have had the shoulder dislocated, either in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the lips.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid death that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, then, when we want to cut the epigastrium, that we cut it in three or four rounds, making a small cut through, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the cut, not in the cartilage; and they are then suitable for sectioning of the epigastrium, there being no char, and the vessels are long.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the masters are poor, then it happens that the jawbone extends to the entire neck, then cut through the flesh as much as it goes to the chin; and avoid the vessels of sinus, if you see nothing, and then cut the gut, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the wet chin that it would have been due to the broken jaw which has caused the deficiency of voice; and leave the wound overturned a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hour has passed since the injury, assemble the two lips of the wound as much as possible, and then apply a dressing that feels firm against the cartilage; then administer medicines that make it seem healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim does not do anything until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is considered dead, and the lack of air is noticed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, it is necessary to treat the epigastrium because the patient cannot breathe, and they are breathing through the wound, and it must be guarded against death; and this is why the ancients ordered to leave the wound over until the malady had passed, and it had passed in three days or four, and then they ordered to sew the wound and cure it, as soon as it was cured. And I will tell you what I see.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see that a maiden is being cut, and she has a piece of cloth in her throat, and part of her chestbone is broken; and I was called to cure her, and I found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discover the wound, and find the blood that came out of it, and although she had not lost much blood and only her throat was hurt, the wound was fatal.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and looked at the wound, and cured her as soon as she was alive; and the only thing that happened to the maiden was that she became pale of voice, and returned after her disposition; therefore I said that there was no great pain in the tailoring of the epigastrium.
de la grosse gorge	Of the large jaw
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Hernias are called "hernias of the neck," and are large hernias in the color of a scarlet, and are more common in women; and they occur in two ways: natural and accidental; or natural has no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident occurs in two ways: either one is similar to fat people, and the other is similar to hernias that come from the artery; and if there is pain, and it is not necessary to tighten more than the small one that is present, and prove and search throughout the introducer: if you tighten as I am fat, and cannot in any way, if the cope, so as to cop the whole of it, if there is none; and then close well, and cure as much as it is necessary, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	Of the shoulder
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many kinds of us, and I will describe all the appearances; and it is necessary that I make a distinction between the newborn and the issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is calenture and fever, as long as the eruptions have not passed, and it has been accompanied by the pangs; therefore, the fever and calenture rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the newborn there is no calenture or fever or pain, and it contains sweat, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the heart, and begins thus like a glass, and becomes large; and they are according to these two appearances, either gray or moist, and the color is so as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	1. It is necessary, when you come to the patient's care, that you first examine and ask about all the instruments called "entromissoires" according to what their form brings or is said in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	2. The manner of incising abscesses in the body is that you press or add more moisture to the wound than you remove in the abscess, and turn your two hands many times until you see that the swelling has disappeared, then this is according to the size of the abscess; then take out the entromissoire and hold it steady as you lift it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	1. If moisture occurs at the incision site, it will appear as described in other abscesses; and if no swelling comes after entropion, it is fat, so it is crossed, and it is taken with tweezers, and it is lightly burned on each side and the wound is washed with the nout; and if it is not washed clean, it is washed in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	2. But if nothing remains, it returns to us many times; and if a pouch is needed, and it does not grieve, use corrosive poultices on the wound, tighten the wound, and apply soothing ointments for the abscess, and cure other abscesses as much as possible; and if it becomes large, remove the lips of the wound, and cure that which causes pain.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	When the vein is resistant or if you hurry, use your glove made of vitrolite and leave it for II to III hours, until the wound stops bleeding and becomes quiet; then return to the compresses as needed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the prolapsed intestines, which are three kinds: large and misshapen, and small; and there are three types of "albarets," which are called "breb," and one which is called "grande," and there are three types: large, misshapen, and small, to encircle the fistula's openings; they are also like the beaks of gulls, which are counted by their horns, and are of tin, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable than those that are black, to encircle the holes of the fistula; and there are three types: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the prolapse.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the claws are of different appearances, as you see: large, medium, and small; and if the claws have II corneas of III ways also; and if the claws have III corneas, and are also of III ways; and if the claws have II corneas, and the claws are only one, and are of III ways; and all these are necessary in their legs.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these we make are sharp, and such as cannot cut anything finer than one part, which burns the flesh because it does not touch the vein or nerve; and these instruments are returned to the hands, so that the patient does not get lost in the incisions; and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are never used except in the legs, like arms, braces, and fingers, and toes, and nails, and in resemblance to these instruments, no other one is made which seems like cuttings of forceps, according to this form, as we also burn the sinews.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed on the shoulder once and only once, which strengthens the veins, the arteries, and never returns to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	The breasts of some men swell when they are about to corrupt, as if they were the breasts of women; and they become fat and bloated, and those who see them heal, if they come according to this form of this line: b. up to g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then the fat is scorched, and then the wound is dressed with medicine burning pitch, then assemble the lips of the wound to stitch, and heal as long as it is healthy; and if the breasts are leaned towards each other, and are as large as those of women, if they are sewn in the corners of the corners, so that the smaller line contains the larger according to this form, from this line to the line g.; then scorch the skin that is between the lips, and remove the fat, and what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not see the wound, or for the decorrection of sanguine, if you fill the wound with soft cotton dressed in corrosive ointment; and leave it as long as it absorbs the remnant and the fat, then heal as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	The first sentence to translate is "des apostemes des asselles". A literal translation
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These apostles that come out of the stirrups are ways for hard scrophuls or have points, and they are full of moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture must be covered according to this form, along the line .b. until the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the whole bow is in the apostle, if you use a piece of linen patch, and leave it until the next day, then take all the linen, and cure with ointment coming as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	When the abscess resembles scabs, if it is like we have said in our words, and the wound bleeds a lot, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery ruptures, and the blood flows out, if it happens many times with blisters, and also the vein becomes empty and bleeds; and if you see this is from the artery, if it is the blister that comes out long; and when you feel it with your hand, if it feels tight; and when it is from the vein, if it is cut apart; and it is madness to treat this blister, and at the same time if he loses his bands and his hair and his mouth of other legs, and it becomes large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. It is necessary therefore to shield the treatment of fire, and the one who is in charge must also shield himself, and in the one who is of a different skin color than the artery that is made from the skin of the long hair; then he cuts the size as the gouges, and withdraws the artery through the pores, as far as it is discovered; then he takes an awl, and pierces it on the other side, and draws the artery with a double thread according to what I have shown in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then the bone that is between the two links of an introducer as much as it does not have what it has, and so release the gouge; then apply the treatment that follows, as long as the wounds are bleeding; and if the gouge is for the vein, then it comes that you must hold in your hand the part that you pull out of the gouge all along the vein, then cut the awl from the part you hold in your hand, and pierce the bone, and if it is double, so that you draw it on the other side; then close the gouge, as I have said, or one of the two parts of the two bones; and if you doubt that the threads do not come out, then another awl is needed for all the gouge at the incision of the first awl, and draws the threads in four places; then close the gouge as much as the superfluity comes out, then close the superfluity of the skin and leave what is shut; then put on a moist cloth dipped in wine and oil, then he applies cures of tents and ointments as much as it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	The first sentence to translate is "des apostemes des ners". The translation
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As apostimes come to the artery and vein, they come from nerves when they are too tight or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this often happens with auxiliaries and you should do it in all joints, and it is an aposteme, and its color resembles the color of corns, and it appears in more positions with pain; when it is extracted, it feels like pain in the chest, but not as much as in the heart, but rather in the loins; it does not affect all parts, and it does not advance or descend, and the one who is in joints cannot overcome fear: by chance, there may be contraction; and he who is on the side or front, makes the mouth sweat.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the graft takes well, if it is anchored with nails, and the root in its place; and if it is large, if it spends in the bone, and burns, then the bone and assembles the wound at its seam, and the cure as long as it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	2. of large bowels hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	3. No time is ever in the belly and does not move elsewhere, and it is a disease called "funge" by its appearance of "aus," and it is the subtle root, and the head is large; and there are times with few and great ones; and I have seen one who had them, his belly which was more like funges than anything else, and it had no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and they were inflamed, and they corroded with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I found them and discovered in one eighteen ounces and in the other six Z., and the incisions are such that you can see if the patient's fingers are moist, and the color of the tool is bluish-green and moist with a subtle root; if the cautery is applied to the large spatula, and they are in your presence, there is a fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For the cutter, there are often too large evacuations of blood when opening a vein, and if you do not want to cauterize, then cauterize; and if you see the patient sweating and oozing from the incision, then take a clean thread well made, and insert it into the tool as we have said, and leave it there; and then restrain, and do not stop pulling the thread until the tool copes with the thread, and feel the work through it; and if the roots are large, then cut them off immediately from the belly, but you should not cut too much, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut the thigh which is of a dark color, poor sense, and watery lait.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are enchanted ulcers, and I will come to treat this ulcer after.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the patient is in pain
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the appearance of the ulcer comes from burn or cut with a sharp instrument, and is in the belly and there are some feces, if it happens in other ways, or of blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of ventricles; and if it is through the rupture of the ulcer and the exit of the bowel, then the color of the ulcer resembles the color of the heart, and is light but causes pain, and has various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on both sides, if it returns, and by chance if it is strangled, and grows large at the mouth of the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when one presses on it with one's hand; and if it is due to blood, then the signs of blood are large and hard, and it is felt according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to vomiting, then the appearance is that of the blood of the artery, or the vein, or vomiting.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you allow the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of incisions for abscesses, for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If there is any doubt or fear, as I have said in the chapter of incisions for abscesses, if it appears to be in the intestine or feces, then command the patient to cleanse his hair, and extend it all around, then sew it tightly around the entire wound; then take a strong thread or cord and tie it firmly, and soak the other half of the aphylaxis on the string or cord; then roll up the half-extended aphylaxis on the string, and take your index finger, and if you find the intestine, tie it with the string, and cut off the excess intestine; if you find the bowels, tie them with the string, and cut off the excess bowel; if the artery is against, or the vein, if it goes in, then return to your work and take two needles, and sew two threads, and sew the two needles as far as you can see that you are perceiving; then roll up the aphylaxis in four turns on the needles, and if you see, touch the needles, and leave the wound as much as it bleeds, and kill the dead part by itself; or if it comes out subtly and bleeds, then do the cure for what is necessary, and cut the aphylaxis as we have said; then take out the blood or mucus that you sew, and treat the wound as we have said, and soothe the aphylaxis with what you took; then take out the blood or mucus that you sewed, and treat the wound as we have said, and sooth the aphylaxis with what you took.
dou chancre	The translation of "dou chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division that the appearance of a chancre resembles one, and we say that it must be cured with medicines, and we say that the fire cautery is to be used for fever; let us call the chancre an "injanreit" in the marriage, and let us take great care in its cure, and tell the ancient one that when chancres are in the loins or can be treated if they are like those that are in the mammary glands, and in the thighs, and in the joints, and it must be all done at the beginning; but if it is large and old, then only you can approach it, for I have never seen a cure for it; no one has ever been cured of it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first line of the translation is: "And the cautery, when it is in the flesh or can be opened, is that you purge the patient of black mud once; then make it cleaner if there is clear excess, then cut the flesh where you want to do the cautery; then your bones will become wet or swollen, and all the hair will fall out, and the bones will feel nothing left; leave the soreness as long as it lasts, and squeeze well the wound in your hand or on anything else, and if they dislocate after the cautery is done, it is against the incision of the artery or vein, if cauterized so much that the unstained parts are swollen; then apply another treatment as soon as it is healthy.
de ydropisie	Of course, I understand your instructions. Here is the translation
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division of the appearances of edema, and how the assembly of the fever is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure done by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: if only; and one should not touch with fire in these two appearances: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore, when you medicate the edema appearance called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not profit, if you look at the maladies are weak, or if there is another disease than edema, if all and solution of the belly and similar things; if one does not touch with fire, because it has doubt; and if you see the malady of strong virtue, and it has only edema, and it is not too much or too little, then you must do: gently hold the malady with your hands, and press the belly as far as the fever reaches to the lowest part of the piss, then take the spatulum sharp according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And so, let us proceed to Part II.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And so, let us proceed to Part II. If the point is not entering enough to reach the intestine when it is felt, and it cannot be bled; then look if the wound is near the intestines: if it comes that you cut through the feces III directly from the anus, and if it is due to the disease of the liver, then the cut must be at the anus III; and if it is due to the mucus, then it must be on the right, and not more than the wound that the mucus causes on the feces, lest the superfluities reach the weak one; then percuss all the skin with the instrument, and the button, and gently press your hand all over the skin from the feces to the face as you would when scraping a pimple or an entree; then perforate the button until the skin stops bleeding at the anus eight, and that is the end of the abscess, and then remove the instrument, and it will be in the form of:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a silver needle, and is light or feathery, and has a small puncture in the part of the bone; and sometimes it costs three, and sometimes four, and sometimes two, and one; and the head is cut so that it resembles a quill, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes make with the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the head of it is a sharp point, so that when it enters the bone, now hold the instrument; empty the first third or the second, for if you see more than it should in that hour, by chance it may be due to the resolution of its spirit from the wound, or it may have gone to sleep, or it may be near death; but according to the quantity of its valour, and according to the dispositions of its valour in the man, and his wits; then withdraw the instrument and hold the aperture, and it will be held now by the part which is swollen around the puncture that was made, according to what I have spoken of, so that you may follow this manner; then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the man suffering thus, and take a small quantity of astringent; do this every day, and keep from touching it too much until it has healed.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	If you doubt the patient's condition, and they refuse treatment, then the cure for the grave or sandwort is to let them drink water or bath and sunlight, and cool down; and the cure for dry medicines as soon as they are healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the removal of the grave, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the grave
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is ever born without having a cough in the grave, or if it is small, or if it is not in its joints.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the intention is not to perceive at all, even the slightest subtlety of this form.
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the catheter subtly and tie it with the thread, and leave it for 3-4 days or 5, and when you see the urine being made, if it is closed, let it be, and then remove it; and by chance none of them fit, because the urine that comes out will not close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the catheter is too small, if it is treated with a tight catheter, as we have said, if it expands.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the catheter in their groin are bleak, because no one is born with a catheter at the top of the penis, because they cannot urinate before they raise their penis; and they cannot enjoyt because of this, because the material cannot come just to the marriage, and it is a serious disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The manner of the treatment is if the patient has a fever on his back, it is the head of the girdle and the cover is like the size of a pen, if it pierces into the environment; and keep away from the evacuation of blood that comes often, and if it comes, if the wound is clean, and cure the wound as much as possible.
des pustules de la verge	of the girdle's pustules
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times they come out in the girdle, and it has a disgusting appearance; and among them are malignant and non-malignant; if you must burn them at the subcutaneous level, and cut and clean them all, then put on cotton wool moistened with Egyptian ointment; then the treatment of ointment is done as much as possible.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the tumor is malignant, of a dark color and painful, then you must use cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	After you have cauterized it, and if the tumor is still hard, and has both dense and loose parts, then you must remove the hard part that was cauterized first; and if it is soft, then remove the soft part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if you remove it all at once, the patient's head may not be secured, and the wound will become infected and blackened in its center; then apply honey and flour to the wound, made from the scars of green peas and vines, and continue treating it until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood comes out of the wound, then follow this form of the moon cauterization:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if the wound is bleeding, then follow these two dispositions: it is knowledge that blood comes out and infection follows; and if the head of the thorn is corrupted and retracts, if you bind a string around it and pierce the thorn with a needle through the skin, and let the saliva flow between; and when the hair reaches the end of the thorn that has not been circumcised, or has been injured by a cut or an abscess, then it is necessary to scrape it with the instrument, as long as the roots are loose and free from the thorn; and if this is difficult to do, then scrape the hair of the thorn at any point except for the tip; then draw the element between II, and then put a subtle drapery of wet linen on the cold water, so it does not get wet.
de la circoncision	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not less painful than other wounds; however, when we perform this operation on our will, and properly as it should be for our children, it is the best and most gentle way to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not commonly circumcise their children, because they do not use it in their law, and have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the greatest part of the masters and physicians who performed circumcision outside the day of the nail, and with forceps and at all costs; if it were possible to cut off the foreskin, and by chance if one could cut off the clitoris as well.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or they may recover, and the pain is doubled, and at circumcision which is not sure the point of the member; and at the circumcision of the finger by chance it cuts the nerve, and causes the wound to bleed, and many times are born without any purpose of circumcision, and I want that.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	The first sentence to translate is: "De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveitit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, if it fits well in the thumb; but that the thread be well twisted around the leather; and make the first stitch as wide as the child's head, so that he thinks the child understands that you only tie the thread around the verge, and then pull it in all the ways you please; then make the knot with your hands quite straight, and put the force between your hands or on your fingers that the children do not see, nor any of the strings; then blow your hand to the verge and sigh or whistle, and hold the thread as high as the child's head is; then make the knot well of the dirt that it is assembled, then tie the loop of a double thread, then tie the other loop to the first one; and keep it as you do in the second reading in the pouch and the index finger, and put between the two loops, then gently pull the curtain and draw the chief of the verge; then let the sand rest and rest, for it is the most difficult; and put powder on and on the powdered glue with a piece of cooked kidney cut into small pieces, pickled in red wine, confit with olive oil rose and fresh, and leave it suspended over the other jar, and the cure for another cure as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the mummification is this: the two heads are thin and are stretching, and the heads are as great as the equal hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mummification is when the teeth come out of the incision; therefore, it is necessary to stretch it on your finger, unless the gum has swelling; and it should be done correctly, and if you do not hold it with your finger, then the gum.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and what is out of order is curved, if it is left until the gum has swelled, and the tooth is quieted, and slightly scorched, then the gum will not be harmed if you press as you hold the part of the gum.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient's leg should be treated with sour plaster for the wound of powder, which we have mentioned or dealt with in powders, and if it does not measure up, it will not work; treat the leg as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	retains urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	If the patient has difficulty urinating due to cystitis, gangrene, bowel obstruction, or other causes, as we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine is dribbling, and you see the retention through the urethral opening, then it should be corbated above the anus; and the patient should be placed with his back on the bed, and the abdomen is expanded from the part below the loins, and the malices are restricted as much as possible; and then the collar of the vagina is constrained to the expression of the urethral opening, because the urine is dribbling; and if it does not come, and the malices feel great pain, then it should be extracted from all the instruments that are called "syringe", and its form is as follows: and it should be made of fine silver hair, like the feather of a swallow; and it should be the tail of a palm tree about half a meter long, and it should be finely made at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	1. And the manner of the urine's exit if you take a double cord and tie it at the neck of the bladder or of the linen or cloth, and cut off the end of the cord; and cut away the excess of the linen and cut off the end of the cord, then anoint the cord with oil or butter and ointment of urine and urine of ox, and make the patient sit on the seat, and the bladder and the urethra are moistened and olive oil and olive oil from Greece, then gently insert the cord into the urethra as it reaches the root of the urethra, then double the urethra towards the bougie; then cut off the cord before it reaches the bladder, and feel the patient come out the empty bladder, and this is done according to this order because either the conductor or the patient will turn; then the cord goes all through the linen pouch and the urine follows the linen, then it is drawn out further, and the urine is made up; and the cord resumes when the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved of the pain.
des maladies de la vessie	 diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When escorcheurs or pus comes into the bladder, or if there is vomiting and you see waters and medicines distilling, then make sure to clean all the instruments called "cleansing," and this is the form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if there are three pulses: two of one part, and one of the other, as you see; and it is read by the medicine that is such that it makes the verge well turn without addition, if you can draw the moisture, and then close when you are done; and when you see your medicines running in the bladder, put the handle of the cathater in the moisture, and draw up the catheter into the drawing tube; if you draw up the moisture into the catheter, and then forcefully pull the drawing tube, if the moisture enters, and comes to the bladder now, then the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle clyster that is used to cleanse the bladder: if this is the case.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	1. It is made of silver or archaic metal, and the head is higher; and from the eye or the ligature; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see clisterizing the bladder, then lay it between the two eyes to form a double-layered pouch, and heat the moisture on the fire; then cut off the clister from the edge, and hold your hand on the bladder all the moisture around, as long as the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder; and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make the circle, and the wire round it; then pull the thick cord through these holes, and assemble the circle like you would an anvil, and put what you see as oil, moisture, and astringent in it, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand as much as the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Of the wound
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division of the kinds of wounds and the extraction of arrows, and we said the difference between the wound caused by a sharp object and others, and in what size we must cover it; and in the belly, and in the groin; and I will tell you about this openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the wound which is most frequent in the belly is in children, and it is a sign that the abscess in the belly has become more acute; and it opens harene, and grits the groin, and it can be repeated many times, and then it becomes worse; and then the child's fever comes back; and it is the lightest cure for children up to four years old, and it is grief in villets, and it is as joint pain, for those who are between joints and joints; and it is the lighter cure for those with large wounds than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	When we come to treat the patient, if we first cover the patient with a cloth, we must clean all the feces that is inside the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never closes the incision.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the legs, and stand up and move him downwards until the incision reaches the bottom of the bladder, and does not once come out at the top; then place his hands between your hands, and his feet on the ground, so that the bladder is completely depressed; then feel for the incision in the area, if you are now ready to cut at the incision.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If the patient does not feel any pain when touching the area, if your index finger is wet with oil from the left hand, or if it feels warm, then the joint is inflamed; and the hole in its foundation, and want to pierce, and when you feel with your finger at the base of the vagina; then press with your finger, and the hole should be seen as you cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the midwife to press the vagina with her hand, and she commands him to stretch his right hand's fingers upwards, and his left hand to hold the bone that is loose at the part where the cut is made; then he pierces the spongy tissue coping, because this is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	1. And they go between the bones and the foundation, not in the cost side of the western flank; and there are three on either side of the incision, and the tail is large enough to cover it if it is wide, and becomes narrower according to the size of the incision, not too large; by chance, the pressure if it is at the foundation, it jumps too far for work; and they check if there is a part with a piece or an angle, and margins: if they are sharp to come out; and if a part is connected, it resembles a shield, and curves, whose end is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	1. If the wound has angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not fall, then you must tighten the nails that are like a lime on the chest, to draw out the piercing so that it does not slip; or you may use a small sharp instrument at the chest; and if you do not manage to pull it out, then enlarge the pore if it is tight, and if it is not corroded, then pull it out with vitriol; and if there are more than one piercing, then first pull out the largest one at the top of the bladder, then cut, then pull out the rest, and the smaller ones after.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is not treated promptly, it can cause a large wound and greater injury.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things can happen to the patient: either they die, or urine comes out through the urethra because the urine cannot be held back; but you must try to treat it, or cut off the clitoris as much as possible, and when you have completed your task, use incense and aloe and dragon's blood on the wound, and draw it tight, and put ointment and wine or oil and rosewater and cold water on it to soothe the hemorrhage; then close the urethra at its opening, and do not leave any part of the clitoris behind.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you dislocate it, if the shoulder is well lubricated with oil and wax, then apply the ointment of ointment of sandarac and base ointment, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if pus comes into the wound and carbuncles, and blood clots in the vein, and it is retained in the urine, which is done in a certain way without a jump with the urine: cut through the wound, and remove the clot, because if it remains, it can cause the vein to burst and bleed; then cleanse the wound with oil and ointment, and apply all remedies that you know, as long as it is healthy; and make sure that all wounds that you treat, that you tie the thighs, and assemble all medicines under the shoulder.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	When the prick is small, and it is conducted by the finger, and it is felt, and the urine cannot be discharged; if the cure of what I say remains, that you cut it many times, is an excuse for the size of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I already have this advantage in mind.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	I will forge according to this form and make it at three angles, with one tapping:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the wire and push it through the vein opposite the prick, so that it does not get stuck in the vessel; then bend the wire around the vein lightly, as it reaches the prick; and turn the wire in your hand at the prick as much as you can feel the prick from the other side; if the urine comes out, then press your hand on that which is stuck in the vein that has been made by the vein.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bone is broken and it breaks with urine, and the gall of the patient; and if you do not know how to do this for nothing, then cut off the end of the piercing and the other side, then make a groove in the place where the piercing is between the two ligaments, then it comes out, and remove the ligament, and cleanse the frozen blood that is in the wound; and the cure until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the piercing of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There comes when the piercing is done in women, and if there is no time, then it is the cure's grief, and is defended by three things: one is that by chance the woman is virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-behaved woman who has descended as far as mires, even when she is in her periods.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	The third way is if, by chance, one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of hands; and the fourth way is if the wound of the woman is more than the wound of the man, because she will make it more profound in size, and great pain will come. And if necessity requires it, then you should know well the wound, and at once take the true vein, and if you cannot find one, then use a subtle one; and this is a wise way in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and she commands that she do what you command of the inquisition of the wound; and look well at whether the woman is virgin: therefore it is her duty to bind her duty or piercing and seek the piercing; and if she is true, if she constrains her duty, and the midwife recommends that she bind her duty or with the midwife, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If the dislocation occurs, if it can be moved slightly by slight movement from the entrance of the vagina up to the root of the thigh; then, press on the wound at the root of the thigh in the cold part of the thigh, where it is most painful, and feel the wound in that part. And do not move the hand away from the wound or the entrance, and make the size as small as possible; then, bind the size with a thread, if you feel the wound is very painful as the cut is deep and can bleed a lot, and know that there are many kinds of wounds: it is to know that some are small and large, sharp and blunt, long and crooked, and those that have rough edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you doubt the appearances to know the end.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it does not help, if you put vitriol on the wound and hold it for an hour until it is not inflamed, then return to your work as soon as the wound is healed, and have bandages as I said in the extraction of the wound to help you in your work; and if it does not help, and it is the artery that is clotted, if you put powder on the wound and tighten and bind it with ribbons and strings, and do not try again this, and leave the wound and do not open it by chance, then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the pain of the wound is calmed, and it is read, if you return to your work, as long as the wound is healing.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia cancer
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The scrotum is nothing more than an assembly of moisture or white sweat, which contains the testicle; and it is called "sweat," and never truly in the testicle's cloth, if one takes care that it is another one; and this is the skin between the white sweat that we have said; and there was never any.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this scrotum is due to inflammation that comes from the testicles, and it is expanded by that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	1. And no time at all if there comes of percussion on the bones, and this moisture in many colors: either it is declining to jaundice, or without redness, or black, or white, and this becomes more; and these are the signs of this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, then the abscess returns, I long for it to be as long as a finger, and not open the bones, for there is much moisture inside.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	2. And if there is moisture in the same cloth, then the abscess returns with a part of the urine, and because it thinks it is another ointment; and if the moisture is between the skin of the bones and the white jaundice, then it feels well; therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, you should apply it throughout the introitory instrument.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the cautery, judge which is denser.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, if the patient is healthy according to what we have done, and the filling of his chest is according to what should be; then he lies on his back, with one foot raised high, and the doctor places a cloth on his stomach; then he lies on his side, and commands the assistant to lift his arm to the right, and extends the knee of the long leg among the fingers until it reaches the point where the wound is; then take the scalpel, and cut the leather of the coat from the waist to the end of the finger, and make a clean cut according to what should be, and remove all the skin; then pierce the skin with a sharp needle at the large abscess, and remove all the pus, and then put in your fingers, and set the skin back on; and do not touch the wound, but only the skin, and cut it if necessary in pieces, so that you can sew it well to the wound, and if the wound bleeds a lot, then come back to it; and if the wound is large, then assemble the two ends of the skin on one stitch, and sew it as you would with other wounds.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you suspect the testicle is affected by another disease, and if the suspended vessels are doubting the evacuation of blood; then cut the cord at all the suspended parts, and remove the testicle, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the wound is assembled into two parts, as branches; then cut the other part in the same way you did the first incision, then clean the sand with the wet linen; and put on another piece of wet linen with vinegar and oil, and tie it around the threads, and double knots of cloth, and fasten it to all the parts that are according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two threads, and use fine linen according to this appearance and they should be sewn together by stitching in the gore of the braies, and some of the points prengent on the foundation just at the back, and others at the part where the poignil is; and one other point on the two angles, and so completely surround the rest in the braier's loop; and never once has this cauterization been medicated with iron, and it is that you prick the subtle cauterization and cope the leather of the thighs, and shave it if as we have said, if the white sweat that contains the ague is discovered; if you take the cauterization according to this form, and pierce the white sweat with pins, and scar it at this subtle cauterization chaut.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	1. And the patient should try in all ways that you can, as long as you are patient; and keep your mind focused on not touching the urethra; and be aware that this operation is more successful; and make sure to prevent dislocation of the joints, and avoid causing pain or injury; and if nothing else makes you uncomfortable, such as a hernia or dislocation of the joint, then cure what makes you uncomfortable, according to what has been said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	1. And if the patient is not sure, and does not want to wait for this operation due to its horror, then perforation may occur, as I said, and if you are certain about the meanings we have said that ramice is the way, then make the patient sit on the side of the bed; then pierce the aphrodite in the part of the vagina as wide as possible, and make the perforation long enough to cover the entire uterus; and if the wound is large, so that all the discharge comes out; then put cotton on the lew, and tie it, and leave the discharge from the wound to flow, and cure as long as the plague is healed; and if the bladder pushes out does not let the discharge come out of the mouth of the plague, so that you can dip a needle or instrument used to treat the plague from the hydropiques, of which this is in front; and enlarge the plague, and be aware that the discharge returns, and it will be assembled after six months or more, and when it is assembled, as before, and then pass through the patient's jaws.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the joints
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	It is said that in the section of this ramification, there are many dispositions, and it seems that I should leave it alone; and I will tell you the evacuation and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say that all abscesses come out either by cutting or by dislocation, and the same is true for joints; and this is by case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to be known that the abscess is caused by superfluous and acute pain, which is expanded in the joints, or by percussion; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the wound; and there is no pain, and it is a grievous abscess; and sometimes there are grizzled abscesses that are purple and fuscous in color, and never come from an artery or an inflamed vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is by artery, if it is incised according to the arrangement of the postmortem cut, when you press on it with your two hands; and only then can you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	That which is made of vine is incised according to its arrangement at the expression of touching with two hands, and can well make the size as in this appearance, and in the other cases; and it is that you cut off the curvature of the bones, then the head is raised, and the skin is white and clear, and deliver the suspensory from all parts of the bone.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the bone is already curved with these characters, then it is necessary that you move the bone and the curvature; and if it is white or in the region where the veins are dilated, then it is necessary that you deliver all of this curvature, and the curvature recoils.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birth of the child is from the lower part of the body, and you can reach it all, and extract the head, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If your wounds are completed, then use the smooth woolen ointment mixed with rose oil and wine, and then continue with other treatments as needed to become healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the inguinals
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	Cis is a number of abscesses wrapped in a wrapping resembling a broom, with the softening of the inguinals, and the patient groans as it happens; and the treatment for this disease is well known to us, and we will tell you the wound of the patient according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	1. It is necessary that you make the patient lie down on his side, then lift up the arm with the elbow at your side, and touch all the fingers that are close to the shoulder, and mark them for you, and extend them; then cut through the skin as wide as possible in every direction of the veins, until they are discovered, and then burn them from each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then tie a string or if it has a double thread, tie it to the first finger where the blood came from, and tie it to the other end; then cut it off evenly, according to the length of the wound, and in the middle of the moistened parts; then cure the wound as we do with others, if any bone chips are not seen that bleed, because none of them come out of the bones, and all the veins come out, so you have to tie the strings to all the veins; if the patient loses his grip due to the incision of the veins, and dries out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The signs when it is extension of the shoulder, if it is that it happens often in long stretches, and not suddenly; and it is the apostemes equal until to the forefront, because the shoulder presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is dislocation of the shoulder, that it brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the apostemes are different appearances, not from the skin but from the inside, and it is because of the exit of the intestine and the wound at the dislocation.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never once has the circle descended with the intestine, and it is held in check, and causes great pain to the patient, even when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron for pain, because it cannot be escaped.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these operations of iron for pain, because it cannot be escaped. And if you command the patient to place their hand in the wound with the intestine at the tip of the finger, if it can enter; then make a small incision between your hands, and gently press the knuckles; then take the keur at the end of the wound, and close all the openings of the coions according to what you have done for opening the wound, and so that the white film is discovered from all parts; then scarify the spot where the coion is located, between the white film which is without the cuir of the uterus, and the second white film, and depart from the uterus the part which is below the cuir of the uterus; and then press the left hand on the keur of the coions, and hold the white film above your right hand, and press the uterus with all the syfac towards the tail; and order the midwife to extend the uterus, and remove whatever is below the liemt; and if there is no white film or hard syfac, and you do not find anything, if it leaks into the belly; then take an awl or a thick string of four strands, and make a small incision in the back part of the syfac, which is after the cuir of the coions; then assemble the points one after the other in a cross, and with the same syfac that was without the cuir of the coions, make a strong knot of two parts; then enclose the points of the strings, and form them into two parts, so that no vessels that are cut can enter into the womb, and the stitch will not come out; and then tighten the knot according to the first knot, and after these four knots leave the white syfac which is without the cuir of the coions the greatest part; and then close the part which is without the cuir of the coions as much as possible, and so that it does not bow, as we have said before; then anoint the fine hair with oil, and put it in plaques, and anoint the knot that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	For no time is it cauterized the white suet that we have said, after incising, due to fear of hemorrhage of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the ligament until it is loose for it; and if it lags in the morning, if it is rinsed with hot water, and placed as we have said, until it is loose; then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia cancer
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made in the same way as the vis which is assembled together with the vessels, lightly after we have slightly cut them; then close it, and cure the abscess of that which operates, until the vessels cease; and the cure as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	1. No dislocation ever occurs in the joints as we have said, and if it does, it is opened; and no intestines are torn, and if they are, it is little, and all wounds are closed; and if it bleeds too much, if it is thought to be a wound or a fissure, until the intestines are torn; and this happens by extension of the spasm which is in the joints, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is relaxed and narrowed the limbs and opened; and the cure is made by cauterization, as we have said before; and no cure is ever made by fire in this way: and it is that the patient groans on his back between your hands, then cut the leg of the dislocation enlarged according to the amount of III doses; and then remove the gauze that was placed on the wound, then take the rag and put it on the leg appearing enlarged according to the amount of III doses; and then press on the abdomen, then cut the II doses appearing enlarged according to the amount of the rag, and cut the other; then remove the rag, and does not cover the gauze nor extend the bladder nor any other thing, as we have told you in the cure of the ramification of the intestines; then the cure is made by the cure of the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, if it heals and cures the wound, as soon as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The scar is strict, and has no appearance in the fracture, and the cauterization is harsh in this place, and further away from health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the hide of the shoes.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the shoes is softened, because the shoes that are made are softened, and it can be seen; and it is the craftsman's work to see the patient cure, when he sees the cauterization on his back, and he cuts off the softened leather from the natural leather; then assemble the two edges at a stitch, and if you see, first the superfluity of the softened leather is three stitches or four firmly; then sew between the stitches, and it cures as well as the other wounds, until it is healthy, and cuts off the thread.
dou chastrement	1. "dou chastrement" translates
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	1. "dou chastrement" translates to "severe punishment" or "harsh correction". The sentence is explaining that corporal punishment is not allowed in their law, and the reason for not including it in this book is that there are other ways to help animals for assistance, such as using ropes for cows and sheep, and whips for goats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	1. "Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure." translates to "Therefore, I say that corporal punishment is made according to these methods: either by attrition or by cutting
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the procedure we perform, place your seat in the best position in a warm room, as long as the hair is softened and melted; then pull on the rope with your hand, as soon as it is back in its place and you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The method of punishment: you must make yourself comfortable, and press the leather against your left hand, then tie the belt, and do it to each thong at the nail, as soon as you have well burned them; and leave no trace of grease or the subtle grease that is on the veins; and this method of punishment is more harsh than that made by attraction, because attraction does not last by chance any thing of the hair, by which the skin desires luxury; then cure the wound as soon as it is healed.
des hermofrodites	1. The first sentence to translate is "des hermofrod
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	2. Hermofrodie is according to two ways as men: one if it be that between the two parts of the body apert as it doth seem like the nature of a woman, or if it have hair, and never once in cutting the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	3. And the other way is in women, and it hath as it were a sharp point and the two parts of the body.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	4. And the cure of the jaw and the face is that you cut off all the sharp points and cure them as other wounds; in the second way, men whose urine escapes through the holes of the coions, have no cure.
de la tentigene	Of the temptation
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Temptation is a charm used on the natural part, as it is too ugly to see; and no woman has it as great as an arm, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you cut off the superfluity of temptation from your hand or nails, and lightly; and do not make it too tight, as it may cause pain, then another cure must be used until it is healthy; and another charm that is in the mouth of the married woman, and the emple, and by chance it jumps, and is according to the appearance of a kow, and therefore they called it the ancient "kow's disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you are able to copy it, as we have said the temptation, and treat it as soon as it is healthy.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic if it is of the nature of the woman not being in her prime, or the pulse is weak; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that came upon her; or it is due to lack of appetite, or subtle sweat or excess, and is made further in the marriage, or costume, or doze, or elsewhere; and deft the conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flow; and knowledge of this if it is by the regimen of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the dislocation occurs suddenly, whether at home or in public.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the pain is slight and creeping, and it occurs suddenly, if you hurry, and the child is born: gather your wives together, and place the woman on her back, spread her legs as much as possible; then form the legs, until the slight pain subsides, and the dislocation becomes apparent; then take a needle, and sew the woman's groin with thread, and hold the woman in that position every hour, until she does not hurt.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the pain is severe and rapid, it may be necessary to cut the flesh as though it were a piece of silk.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the patient's head is cold, if the pulse is weak and the complexion pale; and if you have salves with antiseptic properties, such as those made from dragon's blood, incense, and a large amount of urine; then apply a poultice of wet cloth, so that the wound can be dressed; and leave it for a long time, and then apply a bandage of dry linen; and continue with other treatments as long as the patient is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the wound comes out of character, if it comes out in this way, then it is not a sign of enchantment.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the plaster bandage that is in the wound, it should not be touched with force.
des emorroides	Of scabs
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Scabs are wound openings that do not have a customary scar, and when they become old, they turn into callosities. We have said in the division of appearances and signs, and I will say those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that scabs and callosities, when they appear in the wound, are not noticeable by touch, unless it is by a sharp cut.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are in the mouth of the wound can be felt, they are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	1. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold room, then remove the nails from her toes, and cover her roots with powdered medicines restricting blood flow, such as ice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour water over her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if she loses consciousness, if you make her drink a decoction of sumac and the juice of grenadine apples, pomegranate seeds, and similar things, and then take flour of barley, mix it with honey and ginger, and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it pains, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make the patient lie down on their back and massage the area without causing pain; then take a cup of the juice of plantain or aloe vera with wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has healed, if you cleanse the wound with ointment until it is healthy; and the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the spine of a chestnut, if it works as I have said, then you cleanse it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Of the abscesses of the gums
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come in the gums, such as chancre and gum abscesses, herpes, boils, fistulas, and ulcers, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, it is necessary that in this treatment I deal with the gum abscess that comes in the gums, which is not different from other abscesses; and if you see the sign of the gum abscess, if you know how to see the sign, look to see if the abscess is red at the beginning of its coming, and with chill and fever, and if it becomes red you will see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	1. Nevertheless, do not force the bone, but make him endure as long as the pain is appeased; then place the patient on the bed, and have two pillows under his head, and support his back and assemble his limbs as they fit the leg; let his testicles be expanded, and put his hands on his knees, and hold them well with a belt; then turn his face towards the left side, and insert the instrument into the mouth of the woman, after which comes the form; it is necessary that when you see him inserting the instrument, you fix the first end so as to know the fit of the woman, so that what comes through the instrument does not exceed what it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if they are larger, it is necessary to cover the fit of the woman with cloths, so that the patient is not grieved; and it is necessary that he place the instrument's handle at the end, and draw the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the suture is open and it is held in the hand, if it fits over the head, at the spinal marrow; and when the wound is seen, if it is necessary to put in the wound tented with softened ointment of rose oil or green oil; then place the tent for the wound at the edge of the marriage, and place it above the marriage and on the clean, softened cut with cool or warm ointment until the wound is cured; then the doctor after two days of treatment as often as necessary until it is healthy; and never raise the marriage and wound with a cloth soaked in cool or mint oil and aristocratic plants that are long-lasting. Then continue the treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	When the wound is dressed in the marriage, if it comes that you must not cook with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Labor is first in the dance when the woman knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see her pressing against the bed, and desire to smell the aroma: therefore help the child to be born; and then you should know that these children are according to the natural figure, and are from your own body, and the second one with it; and when you see these signs, if it comes to press gently on her belly, so that the child is soon born; for when he descends from his head, if it is with the second one, and is monied by good hygiene, and the other who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For there is no time that it comes out of its socket, and it comes out of the chest or shoulder, and the hands, or it comes out of the belly or stomach, and it is converted by chance at his collarbone, and through other harmful figures; if it is skilled in the dance that it is wise and subtle in these things, and it warns against error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures on how to help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child is born naturally, and the woman gives birth painfully, and his virtues are weak, if I sit him on a stool or the women hold him, and I anoint his body with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then I dance between his two little spatulums, which is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	1. and then take the second one, and cut along the nail until the moisture that is in it is removed; and then press the belly of the woman as much as the children descend, and if they do not descend, then it is necessary to close the woman's muscles with olive oil; then apply and stitch it, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: if now the children are born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	2. And if the hands come out further, then it is necessary to gently bend them a little at a time; and if they do not enter, then the woman should sit on the bed, and lift her feet to the top; then lower the bed on the ground, and tie it to the woman, so that she does not fall while standing; and if the hands cannot enter, and the children are dead, then cut off the hands at the joint that is before you, and take out the child, and reset it as accurately as possible.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the birth of the child with its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes with its feet, if it is possible to tie at the top; and then the nail is turned a little by little until it is even; then pull out the feet and extend them a little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can it jump as high as possible, if it is commanded to, and I make it stretch out of the bed; if it jumps, let God see.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump, if it is not as we have said, if the nail is turned a little by little until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lightly done.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	1. If it does not come out as we have, say that you will use musk, oil of siege, and melted gum, and apply this poultice all in the mortar; and then according to the nature of the woman's labor, tighten this remedy until it is firmly fixed just below the ribs; and when she has become moistened there, make her wear a collar of iron, and put it on, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit up, then stretch her mouth and nose, and gently press on her stomach because the child is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the child's birth from its parents
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if it puts its hands in its parents' hands often and often; then, let it hang from its neck, and let it hang by its feet, and let it be wrapped in a cloth; and fold its hands often and often; and then press its hands on its belly, and bend the knees of the child, as far as they can go; and if the child does not jump, if it holds its feet and its legs are formed, then let it form its stomach towards the front, then it will push its hands out; and the child will be in this position; and command the woman to pray as much as the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	The issue of the child who comes out wide with a hand.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary for the engineer to bring the hand: if it cannot be brought, then I raise the woman, and go; if she cannot go, then I make her sit on the bed, and straighten the legs; then I stretch the muscles that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then I make her sit on the seat, and study to bring the hand back; and when the child is born in its natural position, and it is large, and I command that it be suckled as much as it wants.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	The shoulder of the child that is born, and it has expanded its arms, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the hand of the child stains its palm, then it turns a little and a little, and is lightly moved; and when it is equal, if it is placed on the muscles of the thigh and the oil, as we have said, then it commands that it moves a little and a little; and when you have done this, if the hand is held on the chest, it commands that it be squeezed; and the hand is stern.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner to all the subsequent ones.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When fire cautery is used on the second time, if the second time causes pain in your nail, as long as moisture is present; and if the child can be placed on its face and neck, if the dislocation is not retained, and it dies; then pull the child's leg, as soon as you have put it so that it should be, and order the woman not to touch it at all: therefore, do it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is said that twins are born many times, and never at three or four; and this is a very strange thing, and has not happened.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	The text contains strange things that do not live, they have no name; I know that they are multiplied and are created by the force that gives them existence, which is connected to the body; and they never appear naturally like all of them at once, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come sincerely, if the cure is as we have said, and it is the subtle dance, and does everything quickly and lightly what it does; and does it in the same way that it is worth saying hello.
de plusors enfans	of more children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IIII or V or VI or VII, or more than XV, and are all formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and cover everything that comes; if it is done according to what happens; if it is done.
de l’enfant mort	The phrase "de l'enfant mort" translates to "of
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When treating the woman of the stillborn child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to cut with your hands; if it happens that the woman is of sound constitution and has no accident or dies; if it happens that the woman is lying on her back and her chin is bent down, and her legs are raised; and the midwife applies the teign de II pars, or she is laid in bed if she is not treated at the descent of the child; then gently rinse the mouth of the midwife with oily oils with musk and fenugreek and lin seed oil, then remove the grease from her hands with these oils and oils; then blow into the mouth of the child lightly, then take care that the bones in the child are not broken when it descends from its head; if she finds the bones in the ears or in the neck or in the mouth or in the beard or in the chin or near the clavicles or in the chest, and the child's head is out at the ear, then take the brow of the child with your left hand, put the comb between the fingers of your right little finger, and blow gently into the child's head with all your hands, and make sure the bone is not found in any of these places that we have mentioned, as long as it returns to the empty state; and this is the shape of the bone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then look for the other shoulder, if you can manage it, when the extractions are equal; and then they should be even when moving from one side to the other, by holding them with both hands, and they should be held tightly, as shown in this example:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If a part is missing, if there are no parts of the other shoulder, cut them in that part, and pull the other part; and if it is not removed, then put this shoulder or higher on the limb, and do so until all parts are evened out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned by stretching, then wrap it around as much as possible; then the coil is in the joint of the heel or at the knee, and you must do the same with the other hand, and make the feet even.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	When the head of the child is large and it is misshapen at the end, or if there is a sudden swelling assembled, then you should cut the spatulate thorns between your two hands and make the swelling and extract the thorn; or you will get it with the instrument called "almidach", if the swelling comes with the moisture or dislocation that follows after this; and then make the child's head naturally large; and then pull apart the bones with the tines, and the child's head jumps and is drawn to the force, as long as the moisture that is or has come out; and if it cannot come out, then it should be cut by pieces at the mouth that you push; and if it is enlarged in the belly or protrudes from the ribs, then it should be cut as much as the moisture allows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	If the child is at its mother's breasts, if there is a gentle attraction, and the nipples are light in the mouth of the child.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If the child is in the belly or stomach, if it covers that you draw it at an angle with your hand; and then if the belly or stomach, as much as the moisture that it has; and if another part of the body is swollen, and the head is drooping, then you should take hold of the mouth of the mother with one hand and draw it out; then take the nipple and draw it out; and if the mouth of the mother is retreated because of the swelling that has come, then do not hesitate to administer things that are moist and heavy; and the administration should be soft and wet, and the mother should suckle slowly and moisten.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its chest, and you place it evenly, then follow what we said in the living child; and if it cannot be done, then the second part will be by pieces, and nothing of the first part will remain.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if it is not as we said in the past, then the cures that come are those that are in the marris; and if they are delayed, then they should be treated with acute restraint, and other cures will be affected.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly some children had died, then consulted another and was told that the others would also die, and they did.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time came some abscesses in the leg, and inflamed as much as it could see, and began to great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the cure, and I thought long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong attraction with a plaster, and after some days more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised much, for the belly has not any bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought that it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted the wound, and with careful hands I took out the bones as much as the woman was better; and the woman saw long time the wound open, and it was a little of blood from the leg; and I do not remember this chapter because when the masters made an strange thing, I thought to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the dislocation back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Then comes the form of pressure, which is applied to the limbs; and then it is turned back into its proper position.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Indeed, the corn should be more subtle and restrictive, and should be made of a flat or rounded material; and the mouth should be no wider than one tooth, and the margin of the wood no wider than half a palm and a bit more; and these joints should be firmly held in place, either on one side or the other, half a palm or a bit more; and these joints are turned by the mouth of the dislocation.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	A second form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of flat or square wood; it has two ends, as you see, like the handle of a glove, and they are wide; when you open the marriage, if you hold the woman by the arm and the leg, then adjust the pins together in the marriage, and hold the end of the instrument between your fingers; then operate all the instrument with your hand as you did the nails evenly, according to the amount you see open the mouth of the marriage, until it fits snugly.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all around us and its appearances are multiplied; when we see them, the more we work, the higher the cost for them in quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument because you have not seen it, for its needs are not easily managed.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second child is held in the womb, if you command the midwife to release the hair, and then she pulls it out, and her hands are forced to the mouth and nose; and if she jumps for this, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If she does not jump, and I can, and make a pertus or a cough, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the mother, such as garlic, rose, anise, chamomile, calamus, and century plant; all these herbs, or none of them, are cooked or can be brewed with water; then put a basin or cough in the mouth of the mother, and the other hand in the mouth of the child, and hold it until the vapors come out of the child's mouth; then pull it out, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second falls quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if after this treatment she remains without harm, and it is not too late, then command the patient to gently moisten her left hand in oil or musk, and then apply it to the wound, and let the second fall; and when she finds it, grip it firmly but not too tightly, so that the joint does not slip during extraction. But it is necessary to move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull; if it comes out and is washed, it will be fine.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the joint is very tight, we have said the treatment is to stretch it and fumigation of herbs; and if it does not respond to all that we have said, do not pull too hard; but it is likely that what is in the mouth of the joint, you will tie it to the woman's navel, then apply ointment tetrafarmaçon; if it comes out and is reinserted, and it comes out; but all the same, if it comes out with a bad smell in the stomach and head, and makes the patient sick.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it comes to that, there are confirmed successful fumigations with this: no ancient ones have proved fumigation of cresson and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is made with which they fumigate the woman with the retention of flowers and the secondine if this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it seems like a dog, and one places the subtle head in nature, and the wide ones on the fire; and it is the fumigations with charcoal, and the ash as much as it is gray, and another one begins again.
de percier lou fondement	to see the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not seen the foundation perceived, but the one who has stirred some subtle facets: if it comes to that, to the dance that he perceives this facet of his own, and not to perceive anything from spumous matter, and leave the plastering that it does not touch; then place on the sick a moistened wine and oil, then the cure of the ointment as much as it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not remain, if he puts on a glove of lead, and leaves his hands free, and is quiet when the children see him come into the rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this remedy without causing pain or abscess; if it is effective, if you cure, if it is like the lead glove.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula with a firm foundation.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from a weak foundation are nodulation, and grow like those that come from the lack of a firm foundation, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when this nodulation is old, it moves, and becomes rough or subtle, and never are these fistulas persistent; they are known by the fact that they are caused by diarrhea or flatulence when the patient has diarrhea, and by chance in some cases.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that puss into the bladder, and into half of the vagina; and they reach the joint of the cervix, and into the womb.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And if you cannot find the fistula at its base, and it is not visible: then you should use a thin needle or a wire in the fistula when it has no twists.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twisting, then use a small tent or a horsehair as a guide, until you feel the tent or the hair in your hand; and if you do not feel it, and there is no emission, wind, or vomiting, as we have said: be careful that it does not perforate; if you hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula is present in the vagina or conducted from the urethra, and if the urine jumps out, and cannot be relieved by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is felt at the joint of the clitoris, if it is tight and causes pain in the leg; if it is that it is displaced to the belly, and no medicine can relieve the pain by rubbing; and in these fistulas there is no cure except labor and vanity of proud women who intermeddle in them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not a true fistula and not an old one, there is hope for health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient groans at your hands on his back; and he lies on his legs until they are directed to his belly; then make a tent of rain or plank, if it is tortuous, as long as you see or the test comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	When the patient feels pain at the base, if you think it is a dislocation, then it seems that it has been perceived; and if you discover or feel between your toes the sole or the heel, then you should know that it is persian; if it does not straighten with effort, then it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	All wounds can be cured, but it is rare; and if you do not heal, then you should know that it is because the fire cautery is too small for the fistula, as said before; and the wound should be cut all the way through the fistula until it reaches the base; and repeat this two or three times, as you see that these charsets must be arsed, which are like a pen of ostrich; then the cure of soft wounds is to bury them in damp earth, as they are fresh, then the cure of ointment is to anoint and smear with oil.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is in good health, so be it.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If the wound is already infected, it cannot be cured; and if you attempt to enter, do not pierce with a needle that is too small, and cover the wound with a thick layer of cloth or ointment, and you will see the fistula appear at this point where the covering meets; if the cope begins at the opening of the fistula, and ends before the tent, and then cauterize after, as it reaches the end of the tent; it will be delivered from the tent, and will remain; then mold the other charms that seem like a feather's point, and there will be none left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If it does not harm you, and cuts between you and the wound, whether by fire cauterization or medical boil.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cauterization involves two things: it is known as the surety of these burned parts, and the closure of blood vessels and the stopping of moisture; then the care of wounds softened in butter or in ointment as long as they do not bite, and it is fit for the burns to be in the wound; then cure the ulcer of sore sores encased in dry char, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes suddenly from the side, and it is moved away from the chest, if the wound is large or small, inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tension, and if it is the skin or face or char, or if it is near to percussing, if not but only a sign of hope and expectation, by applying one of the three methods: if you cauterize as we have said, or if you cope just in front, or if you puff if it has tents and cures as we have mentioned; and do not take too much of a front, that you do not cover the part that holds the fundament, and if necessary, take the exudations by the chosen sense; then the cure, as we have said; by chance if it is healthy, or you remove the covering and mundy then when it is coped from the fundament, or by tent or another appropriately appointed instrument; then make the char that is in the wound as firm as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to prolong the fistula in the part away from the fundament: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And no time are fistulas made in this way: and when you reach the end of the fistula, it is either costive or has a firm hold on the skin, if you take a tent according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And if I cut it in two, and cut the tent all the way through the fistula as much as it is at the end:
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is perforated on the margin of the firm skin, then cut the thread at the end of the fistula as much as you reach; and cut the head of the thread, and assemble the two ends, and pull them apart, and leave one or the other; and restrain it no time, as long as the threads cop with those that are between the two, and chew; then cure the wound as much as it is sore and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you try in all possible ways that you can, it will not work if it is too tight.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not make sense to try to close the fistula if it is too tight, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the sharp-spined spatula used to make the fistula is as follows: first, it is inserted into the mouth and then turned; and on the other hand, if it does not pierce or cannot pierce, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of the tissues.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	1. Dislocations occur in two ways: either they are caused by the foundation, like resin grains, and they can be small or large, and they can lead to sinus drainage, and they can have one or more, and they weaken the foundation and its base; but those that weaken it the most lack moisture, and they may have a few drops of turquoise or a few drops of blood, and they have the color of corns; and the treatment for those who have weakened the foundation is that you command the patient to spit in the mouth as much as the foundations can be, until they become stronger, and they see the worms; if you hurry, and you can hold them with your fingers, or you keep them in your nails, then tie them at their roots; and if the uncinated ones cannot hold them with their moisture, they should be laid out, or wrapped in cloth, or a piece of camomile, and they are removed from your two hands, then they are tied, and some hot powders that are in the cauterization leeward are applied; or they are cauterized as it is said in the cauterization chapter, for the cure of other cures as much as it is possible; and if the foundations cannot issue, they should be clysterized with clyster mouth and sharp with washing whatever is in the foundation, so that it can issue openly; and if the patient's mouth is not preened, and the filth is strong in the foundation, then the cure is light; and it is that you should preen with your finger or nails, and they are tied, and they are cured as we have said, as much as they are possible, and they do not fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If it comes to pass that you intend to sew according to this manner: Take one thread, thread it through an awl, and then pull the thread out and make the awl pierce from another side, and turn the two ends of the other thread around the awl, and if they are wide; and then draw up the thread, then let go of the thread, and draw out the awl, and do this to all the others, and leave the excess of the suture; then put the foundation damp with oil or linseed oil or wax, and put it on the foundation, and command the patient to lie down; and then let it stay as long as it is needed, and when it is ready, if the cure for the wound and other cures are needed, until it is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	1. "Dou" means "pain" in Old French, so the sentence translates to: "Great pain or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	1. "Maintes fois" means "often", "fiens" means "clots" or "clumps", and "constricting in nature" means that the constriction is causing a problem. So, the sentence translates to: "Often, clots form in the intestine due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is severe, medicine is of no use.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. "Si covire" means "if it is necessary", "spatumile" means "a spatula", "ungle" means "an unguent", and "escorce" means "to scrape". So, the sentence translates to: "If it is necessary to use a spatula or an unguent to scrape off the scar, which does not let moisture in; then the treatment should be as follows: when it is soaked, as much as it can hold; and if it cannot be soaked, then the rasping should be done more forcefully than before, until it sings, and it should be burned; then the treatment should be as follows: when it is dry.
dou fremit	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Antor is a small appearance that should appear on the chest, and it moves with every breath; and never does the patient feel it, and it is felt as if they are dying of fremit, and it comes throughout the body, and more in the hands than in any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is if you take a horsehair or a feather from a vulture, and place it on the fremit, until the purple circle encircles the fremit entirely; then turn your hand over all the hair until you cover all around the fremit, and put it in front, and excise the fremit at its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, that I make something like a iron or steel needle according to this form, and it is subtle and thin:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	I do not know if you understand, but hold it with both hands and press. And if you see, that the cauterization moves, as it is in front or in this chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the chlister.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No time has it been made that silver or archaunt is cauterized, or hammered iron or wire; and no time has it been made of these petty and large stumps, according to those which are in use.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	When it comes to treating children and weak and painful ones, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clitoris is small and large if it is wide, or the belly is shaped in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a deviation or the belly is deformed, as you see, and the clitoris is not perceived; and it is in one of the costals, and in the other, and so is the belly, or it puts medicine from a cow's vessel or from a female's purse, and all parts of the small holes are perceived, and between each hole there must be a thread, then sew in these holes as much as the thread will allow, then assemble the belly like a deer's; and when the medicine is given, if the instrument before a strong thread is attached, then close it; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	1. And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or unguent of urine or something similar, then gently open it; then the midwife applies her hands evenly, as she wishes, then remove the clister, and ease the woman's legs to the parturient, and if the medicine comes out, as much as it can; and if she sleeps a whole night, it will be more help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if you clisterize due to disease of abdominal pain, and the medicine comes out, if it recurs as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the swelling is or fundament, or gangrene, whether it be the clyster also subtle or not; and this is the form of the subtle clyster that is drawn:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division of the cure of wounds; or you will say the cures of hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the place or the wound is made, and how it is made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things made by wounds are made by the piercing of the wound, and the size of the spike and the cuticle, or lance, or dart, or spear, or similar things; or they are made according to the places of the bodies, as a wound that is made at the neck, or at the shoulder, or the breast, or the stomach, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds on the shoulder, for the remembrance will come to his chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or the bone is not broken, if it is due to stinging of the pierce or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of hemorrhage from the head: if the latter becomes healthier of the skull itself if there comes a little blood from the wound, and it is healthy on the opposite part; and avoid the surgeon's fullness with wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not become healthier, if the meat is anemic and does not drink wine, and does not eat char, and dresses the wound, if it is apostamed chafed comes, oiled or in vine oil only, or in vine sophitic; and if it has not been apostamed chafed, if it is placed on the wound, it is fresh at all its sanc, and it is not moved by the air, dust, which I will say a bit later; and if it is dried out, if it is placed on some griefs, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a spear and its surroundings, and the lips cannot be reassembled by tents, if they can be assembled by stitching, if I say as abdominal wounds, by stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone, and it can be seen, and holds only by a point, if the cloth; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore the hardness in the leather of the leg, and order the patient to eat large meats, such as testes and cooked flour, as well as chicken, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you have or wear leather for nourishment, and it does not reach the bone, if the cloth is loose, and gutters out, then treat it; and if the artery is in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicines, if you want to stop it, and if you loosen the thread, if the end of a string; and if it does not benefit, if it is cauterized.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	When these wounds are small and simple, if the cure is light: and it is that you put on this powder that has no smell but the one of the herb.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take some incense; burn three parts of dragon's blood; three parts of live chalz, and the fine powder, and apply to the wound, and draw it out as it unites with all its sanc; then close it well, and leave it to dry, if it does not stick; for one does not close the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never has it been done with only chalz, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound has not been moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is not healing quickly, then in this case, do not use any of my powder; but use instead some digested ointments or dough made from barley flour, as it grows stronger; then continue with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	If the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then if you remove it with fine tweezers; and I will tell you about this later for the major fractures.
de la plaie dou col	of the major wound.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes of the neck and it is simple, then if there is no difference between it and the minor neck wound; but if the wound is of the collarbone or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	1. If it is a nerve, if there is no other engine than leaving the treatment, and nothing to restrict, because the nerves are cold and they withdraw; and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation is with the brain, which is the colder member; but let the medicine be warm, like cold water rinsed, and mixed with rose oil, and rinsed again in cold water, and other piercings according to this method, and moistened things.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if the wound is large, if it is bound with bands, then the treatment as soon as it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	1. If the wounds are deep and filled with blood, whether at the base or higher up; and if the artery is cut, and bleeding occurs from the wound, if it is stopped, and the lobe, and the cauterization is made; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the jaw, and the guide is kept, as the meat does, if the jaw is under the throat bone, and it is returned according to its natural form; then the dislocation is reduced, and some joints are left, then the treatment of wounds is discarded as soon as it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, if it wants to; and if there are pieces of bone, if they are carefully removed, and those that cannot be removed, if they are left as much as the wound allows, and the issue is discharged and cured; and if the wound is fresh, if powder is applied on the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If it has in the wound bone and if it has an abscess, then the treatment is as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of the arrow or of the spear
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is of the wound of the arrow or of the spear, and the wound is gushing blood, then look at if the wound is mortal; and if it is, then the patient must die; but if it is not mortal, and it is fresh all around the vein, then do not delay in applying the powder at the first hour, and do not tie it with the vein until it stops bleeding, and revive the patient to the chest, and open the mouth; but if there is no ointment, then put cotton in the wound to dry out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four hours, or more, until the spasm or trembling of the chest does not occur; and when you see the bones in order, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat the wounds with remedies and other remedies, as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot be healed, perform the operations that have been made, according to what can be done.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is an incision of a sword or a knife, and it is simple, or on the back, if the cure that is in front; if it is large, it is bandaged; and if it is small, it is powdered; and if it is infected in the bone, and the pieces are cut off, if the wound allows, and the pus is drained; and if not, let the wound be left to suppurate, if the extractions are removed; and other wounds have other judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre". The translation of
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre". The translation of "dou derrompement dou ventre" is "great pain in the stomach".
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no harm to the intestines, and it is difficult to set, this is one of the two methods: either because the size of the wound is small, as we have said, or because the intestine is contracted due to inflammation.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is inflamed, handle it in this way: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth only, or soak it in cold water and squeeze out the excess, and gently pull on the intestine until it relaxes; and never repeat this action, as it can cause more harm than good.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	When you see the flame departing, if the intestine is rough or sharp and inaccurate, it is because of this that the entrance is narrow; and if it cannot enter, then a small wound is made with the instrument on the side of the face; and the first cure is to cut off the tail, which is not necessary at all times but is necessary: and this is the sternum for the fend: if it is cut from the cartilage and does not pierce, and you see this form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	When the wound is enlarged and the intestine jumps out, if you put it back in accordance with its natural form in its own place, if you can, because this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower abdominal region, if you can make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his chest; and if it is in the lower abdominal region, then raise the chest and thighs higher than the surrounding areas, and thus the wound in the one of the two parts will be higher than the other; and then manage this in large and messy wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wound is small, and it is in the lower abdominal region, if you can make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his chest; and if it is in the lower abdominal region, then raise the chest and thighs higher than the surrounding areas, and thus the wound in the one of the two parts will be higher than the other; and then manage this in large and messy wounds.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I arrived at the intestine after it had been without food for 24 hours and was wounded 15 days ago, and I cared for it and it is now healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And he looked at the wound that was about to die, and it was a miracle; and I did not cure him with ointments, because I am in II leu where no such thing is found, nor any medicine; and I poured more on the wound twice a day, and the honey from bees as soon as it was healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you will tell me the two proper ways of sewing: take the needle, and pull out the thread from the part that is closest to the end; when it has passed through the eye of the needle, if you have pulled out too much or too little, or if you have pulled it out in another part, then pull it out from the other part of the denuded part; and the stitches will be like those made by the barber, and you leave one time the thread on one side, and take it back on the other, until the stitch is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, which Galen calls his own, is not unlike what anyone does, that is, bringing together the two parts naturally and applying one end of a needle to the other in this manner: take a thread or needle point and pierce it into the cloth, then leave the two threads; then turn the thread over and pierce it into the part that corresponds to the eye of the needle on the opposite side; then pierce the other end of the same part with another thread that is on the other side. And this is the better way of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	1. If the patient hears this speech and no one testifies to it, then one must sew the belly around the arrows, or at least one; and it should insert one arrow on one part, and the other on the other, in the manner of those that are crooked; and when the flesh is rotten in the belly, if it is more painful than other wounds in the stomach.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	2. The judgment of the wound is if it is as bad as the judgment of other wounds: and if you treat the fresh wound with all its strength, unless the gut has been moved, then rejoin the intestine and the colon; then put some powdered charcoal on the wound, and if the gut has been moved, then put any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is bowed; then mend the gut, and be sure of the suture, and the mirror; then cure the wound as you would other wounds, until it is healthy; and if you have no medicine, then put some, as much as it comes out of the bowel, and mix it with vaseline, and rub it on both sides of the wound as often as it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not have another skill in other positions than wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not cause communality as the principal members, then it comes that you lighten it slightly with oil of tamarind or rose oil, and put on the bandages, and remove the sticks; and if there is pain or swelling in the belly, and many times come, if the festered are washed with red wine, and also the swelling comes to the intestine; and the percussion gives lighter relief than the pee.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "young" cannot heal until it is unwound, and this is due to the tightness of the knots that are in it, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the gash falls off the wound, and it is reset as tightly as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it becomes large and turns black, and you see the black limb that has been turned black, because it has veins and arteries; then cut what is in between the ligaments, and put the head of the shoulder down towards the part of the wound that has bowed, until the extraction is aligned with the gash as it falls off, and the plague bows.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the bursting of a bowel
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine ruptures and the wound is small, if it can be restored with a few stitches, because I have seen that some were mangled or wounded by a lance; and it was the wound on the left side of the stomach, and it was infected and became an abscess, and in it was the egestion and the vomiting; I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not stop refining until it was healthy, and I examined it.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it sutured, I doubted that the patient had no harm in his belly; but he had none, but delayed in better arrangements, and drank and ate; and they said to any experimenters that when a small wound is made in the intestine, one must stitch it in this way: take great testes, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the mouth has overturned the lip, if it is drawn into the mouth with the lips, then close the testes, and it will stay if it cannot slip, then make another friction in the same way as before, until the wound is entirely covered; and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	1. If the root of the thorn is in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a thread as fine as a hair from a beast, in this manner: take the root of this thread of intestine that is most clean, and then tie it to the root of this thread I fil of lin subtil thread, then pull the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and untie it at the rupture; and this way of stitching is not worse than according to the course of love and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the large intestines, if it does not heal or become healthy, then it should be as fine as possible.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	It is said that all wounds and abscesses, when they heal, if they are called universally "fistula", and at the same time if they are smooth and have a knot.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the truth of nodation, which is hard and painful, or one feels pain, and is as smooth as the feather of an owl; and never in a clear leap, and sometimes thicker; never thin, and sometimes thick; never small, and sometimes large; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that all wounds which are not healed, and do not have char, is only due to one of the eight causes: it is to know, by the small pain or grief, or by malice; or because the pain is too hard and affects the lips, which does not leave any pain; or there are too many bowels; or the matter is impure and of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or because the property in the region is delayed digestion, and delay in health, and disappears by nature; or there are wounds or holes: and I have already shown all these causes and their signs and remedies with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	The following sentence to translate: "Or covenant that I make you know the cure for fistula which is made by hand's work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	1. When fistulas appear in all the limbs of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the small intestine, the large intestine, the bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spinal column, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if a part that comes from the proper member of the limb is affected, and it resembles these.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	1. And all fistulas of this kind are of bad fortune, and only labor and ignorance; and if there is no fistula that does not come from the part I have said, and you are a doctor and you see it, then take a needle or iron, if the fistula is straight, as you wish; and if the fistula is bent, then take a fine needle, for the points of the needle do not penetrate well into the bending; and if the fistula is in the hands and you do not want to search for it with needles, then take the pertus that is nearest to it, because the moisture from one pertus makes another, and cleanses it; then you will know if it is bone or nerve, and it is hard to feel with your hand, and ask the patient to tell you how much pain he feels when you press his hand with it, and the leu or the nerve or the artery or the vein, or any of the joints I have mentioned, if the needle according to what I have said, and then the cure will be as I have said; and then the care, when it is healthy, and the fistula is well formed in its right place, if it comes that you close it in the same way that you opened it, as far as you can, then put soft tents in medicine ague, and the bouts you put in until they reach the end of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is exuded from the fount; and then put clean bandages in a healthy girdle, as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, if the needle.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	1. If li os do not hinder or the principal limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is discovered, and it has corruption and darkness, if it lasts as long as the corruption remains entire, then the treatment of strange things is done as soon as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and the bowel is straight, as before, you must know that you are not able to do anything: if it is discovered and you wish to be at the root, and all the corruption is removed, then restore the bone; and if it is then healthy, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	2. If the corruption is too deep, that you will not be able to come; if there is no other means than strong nails in nature; and if it has small bones corrupted, and you draw them with hooks, if the instrument is flexible for this, and if there are many bones, do not leave any; and if moisture makes contrary, and it does not cause error or pain, then cope and moisture and char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	When you do not operate on the wound within an hour, if you cover it with a poultice made of earth and leave it until the pus is drained from the bones, and then if the bones become softer; and if they are large bones such as those of the thigh or hip, if you only allow the corruption to spread so that the blackness does not extend throughout the bone, then restore the wound; and if a large part of the bone is corrupted and becomes loose from the bone, if it comes out, cover it with earth and put a bandage on it to prevent further corruption, and then treat it as much as possible; and I will tell you about a fistula that came to my leg, so that you can use it as an example and help in your own practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The first sentence to translate is: "Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinnt a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; but li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I sewed a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some were connected to all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I was determined, and I entered through one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and broken; I knew that this was a part of the rotten bone, and I made sure there was no other corruption, as it was mine; and then I began to restore the wound with medicines for a long time, and could not suture; and then I left, and discovered the bone in front, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and treated it, and then set the bone; but I could not do so until I cut out a piece of the bone, and the rest was all its parts, then I restored it with medicines; and it was cured and healed quickly, and never wanted to resume the operation for the fear of the suffering of the patient who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had caused him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For since the evacuation of blood is often, but it was completely healthy, and a hard char was found on the bone, and it was in good position and had no harm or contrary at all, nor in the air or coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in no part of the head, then it should be set in this way: take the wires, and draw them up to the top of the head bone; and command that it does not extend further than the first wire; and put another wire larger than the first one on the same side as the first one, and tie it around the char that is out of the bone, and pull the char back towards the bone, so that you can see the corrupted char; and place a bandage or a table under the bone to cover the corrupted char; and set it as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and set it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	When the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in a large or small part, if you manage to cut through the bone entirely; then remove the infected part, and separate it from the other part of the corruption, and take out the longer part of the corruption and short part, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, if the corrupted joint is affected, and the bone or it contains another part; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the joints, if there is no other angel than a small one; and if the corruption is on the hand or foot, if it is strong in that place, but it is necessary that you investigate the corrosion as it opens, and the bone or the flesh will not oppose you; and you should cut it in all ways that you can, but the bone or the flesh will not harm you; and you should be careful of the incision and the sews on the bones are many, according to the seat of the bones and the appearance of the bones, and their roughness and subtlety, and their growth and their shrinking, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this it is necessary to appear at every appearance of the instrument; and you should be careful that the work shows the instrument that you have, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; if you are unable to use the instrument that you have according to what it should be.
dou feu	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	The first sentence to translate is "Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os is descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	1. And if the wound becomes infected when you work, if you cauterize the wound quickly or put on any restraining powders, then return to your medicine as soon as it is completed, and tie the wounded limb with a lace that can be tightened, and treat it until it is healthy; and I will tell you what happened to my patient in my time: he had a black spot that seemed to be on fire, and this corrosion came first in his right hand, and it burned all of it; and when he saw the corrosion, if he could not cover the hand, it became healthy; and later, after he returned with the corrosion or both hands, it came to me, and I put certain things on the hands after the circumcision, and I could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I should cut his hand, and I did not want to lose hope of curing the matter; and I also thought that if he cut his hand, he would not die because the virtue of his hand was weak; and he despairing returned to his land, and he covered his hand with a bandage, and it became healthy; and I had no other to tell you that for this reason, if someone else has to do something similar.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	1. No time comes with dislocation in the shoulder blade, and it lasts as long as there is a great assembly of bows; then it is pulled out and perforated, and in a jump the bow is thrown, and the wounds are closed like those of a hose; and the skin that is covered is as fine as silk, and does not touch the bone, nor the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy" and not "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin if it covers the entire shoulder blade, and at the same time when it is fine, as silk; and it does not rot for corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	1. If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture and it cannot stay in place, even with slight movement, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the belly is in its place, do not let it move; and if you do not cover the patient's head as you see fit, so that the belly moves downwards to the lowest part of the body where it is, when the belly is in its place, do not let it move and do not cover the patient's head as you see fit, so that the belly moves lightly along the body; and take consolidating medicines to help the wound, and they should be placed on the draped cloth that covers the entire wound; then cover the part where the pertus of the wound is largest with another piece of cloth according to the quantity of the pertus, and place it over the wound of the sain for aligier the belly, and do not leave the great draped fold until after one more time; and the person who is near the pertus of the wound often presses on the belly to see if it is venom or little or too much, or digested, or indigested; and take warning if the patient feels pain or not, and if it has aposteme or not, and when your medicine has been extended and you see the nature that leaps from the pertus of the sain, if you see that the breasts have already changed, and approach the wound; then leave the morning or evening, and when you dress the plaie, if it changes the other draped fold, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become swollen and indigestible after the first year, it is advisable that the breasts are not nursed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the venomous substances are soft after long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if breasts become swollen and indigestible after the first year, it is advisable that the breasts are not nursed. And if the venomous substances are soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health is approaching. And if the wounds become soft after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, know that your health
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	The first sentence to translate is "de l’aposteme de l’ungle". The translation of this sentence
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	The first sentence to translate is "Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe". The translation of this sentence is: "Gangrene is a wound that affects the finger or toe, or sometimes other parts; and when it becomes infected, if it comes to gangrene, and spreads and blisters as far as the root of the finger, and sometimes even further; and then comes the corrosions on the bone, until it causes pain, and the head is large, and the color is dark".
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut off all the excess that is left of the fingernail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is great help when the bone is sound and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the tendon, and it begins to ooze, and blanches, then you must cut off the part of the nail that points the tendon, and burn it at the top, and carefully and lightly cut off the remaining part of the tendon, and apply medicines that are ardent and corrosive to heal all; then the treatment of wounds as long as they are sound.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	1. If the corrosion is in the bone, if it penetrates and breaks, because as much of the bone corrodes and becomes, so cannot be healed; and if you see the other corroding, if the cope is in I of us as it was said before, then treat it as soon as it is healthy; and if it is hardened, cut it off, and it will cause great pain, then it comes that you heal the first; then cut the big toe with a sharp knife passing through the bone, and make sure that the cut does not reach the end of the toe, because the patient will feel too much pain; and if it happens, then put something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain is great from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	You must adjust the hand that is not in the hands of some men by chance, and by chance it has been lost, and never returned, and no one has ever been born from the root of the jointure, or the birth is in no one's womb.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who has not been born from any womb, and he who has been lost at the jointure, by chance is silent; the size of the one who is misplaced is lighter, in a similar way: the size of it in its root is like that of a wide slate.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who has been lost at the root of the jointure is difficult to cure: if you have a lot of pain.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the event of a dislocation that cannot be reduced manually, if it is possible to first reduce the bone back into its place, then cover the bone with a soft cloth suitable for this purpose, and then treat it as needed until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The symptoms that come are either born with them, or caused by wounds, or caused by burns, or due to other reasons.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If the scar is covered with a cloth that allows it to heal according to its natural forms; then place between two sheets or soft cloths moistened with olive oil, so that it does not stick; or place between two pieces of soft linen as long as it is sore, if necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If any of his two hands come to the soft palm, if it holds tightly, then it comes.
des vils	of wolves
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	There are large, swollen veins full of melancholic superfluity in various parts of the body; and more often appear in the legs of those who go to church, work, and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must never administer any purge of colchicum, and then the correct dosage of the basilicon.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is on the wound, and draws out the black blood; and the other way is if you tie the vein, and take it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The first line of the text translates to: "The size is determined in this manner: first, raise the patient's leg with the knee bent firmly, until the thigh does not become subtle, then tighten the leg of the surgeon's hand around the bone of the joint; then cut and treat the vein in I, II, or III, with a large size, then remove and draw out the dark blood from your hand, from one to the other, as much as possible without causing too much pain to the surgeon's strength; then lie down, and command that it be painted with meat in black; and continue the evacuation and cleaning of the wounds as the veins become clear, and note the patient's condition.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient's leg is affected in this manner: cut the patient's hair, if it has any, then wash it, and heat the leg with hot water until it turns red, and inflame the veins; and if there is no fire, then heat the vein with fire, and then place it at the end of the leg at the knee or in the arch of the foot; then wrap the leg with linen, and scarify the vein from each part, as soon as you touch it, until it appears when you feel it; and it will be red and black, and if it seems like a bloody cord; then boil the oil, as soon as it is dry, and place it at the end of the leg, and then wrap it with a piece of cloth, and then scarify the vein in another part; then scarify the vein along the same line, as many times as you have done, and place it in another cloth, and then scarify another part, or more if you have them, and then place it, and then scarify the second part, and then remove it from the first; then remove it from one tail to another, as far as it goes, and then place it in another cloth, and then scarify the second tail, and then remove it from the first; then remove it from tail to tail, as far as it goes, and then place it, and if you cannot lift or raise it, if a needle pierces the hardest part of the thickest thread twice, and then place it, and then cut and lift it, and then pierce the wound with a needle in the other hand, and then place it, and make sure it does not move; and do not let it touch the patient's leg, for if it does, it will be harmful to the patient; and when you have treated it, put some linen with fine hair soaked in wine and olive oil on the wound.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the eye is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then if you cut it improperly, but do not cut through it, and the wound is as we have described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron from which the eye is cut if it curves, and does not cut through it, and it is a large gash, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but if it is thick as we have said, then this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the common vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it may be found elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the serpent's belly and turns, encased between the hide and the char.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes into the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes its color, and begins to bleed, as if from the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If the wound is open, then you should wrap it with a piece of cloth from one and a half to two inches wide, and leave the end hanging out of the leg, and every time it is not closed, if the wrapping covers the end, and the now, then cut off a part of the cloth and rewrap it, and do not cover the entire root, until it is all out; because if you cover it, it will return to the body, and bring in aposteme and poison or blood, and serious illness; for this reason, it is necessary that it be treated frequently and quickly, and nothing or no one remains or comes out; and there is no time for this wound when it is treated with X fingers or Y, and some hands have come to me, and it was treated with X fingers, and when you wrap it, if blood bubbles or oozes, and the end perforates the skin, then all of it must be cut off; and the matter that is decomposed should be removed from the leg with any medicine porridge without any oil, then the cure should be done like the apostemes.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never once in this vein do the hands fail, and at the same time when it opens at the joint of the shoulder, or rather at the shoulder blade, and a fever comes on, and the patient is ill; cure the donques as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of the verses that come between leather and char
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "the disease of beef" because it often occurs with blood, and is a small worm that goes between leather and char, and goes up and down the entire body, and sends pain from one member to another as it cuts through the skin or flesh, and causes cramps; and it is caused by some humors, such as snakes, liver, and ascarides in the belly; and one doubts its malice, because when it goes up the body, it reaches the head, and comes to the oil, by chance enters, and destroys the oil; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the wound healing and drying, if it cannot be helped but when it comes: if you can manage to read the bone of it and the flesh around it well, then cut and remove it, and put it in a vessel, and do not touch it if it is cauterized with fire, as long as it is alive; and the greatest harm it does, if it comes that it is near the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or approaching the oil, if the sorcery forms around it, then cut and remove it; and do it; and it is necessary to use the salve of mundification of liquid medicines for the humors of the body, and avoid foods that are spoiled.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from wind
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "wanderlust", and is a pain that comes to any part of the body, and then spreads from one part to another; and I see what I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called a female patient, and I saw my arm, and I saw a small flesh in the vein of the shoulder; and afterwards, I saw it rise as if it were a leaf from the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as if living silver when it cuts through the bone; the pain left that arm, and moved to the shoulder, and then a little later spread throughout the body, so that it came to the other shoulder; and she told me that she dislocated in reverse along the chest, just as I see.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed to see how it moved from limb to limb, as I have never wanted this disease to happen in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Indeed, I wanted to make sure that the pain was not transferred from one part of the body to another, but I did not want it to be so. And I thought it was because the woman had tightened her corset, and the veins were discovered, and because of this appearance of constraint; but I did not know until then that this was true for those who are delicate, and who have moist veins and recovered voices.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	When you see the disease being cured and the patient feels pain, if it opens as we have said, and if the limbs and bones are not constrained to the body, then cauterize the limb; and if you do not see this at your eyes, if the cure of these that open the constraints is like pills made of herbs, and pills of sassafras, and similar things.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the wounds they cause in the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of arrows is that some have large points, and small, and barbed, and sharp; and some have sharp angles, and some have curved, and some have pieces; and one that pierces any member in different ways: either in the principle members it pricks like the brain, liver, spleen, lung, heart, stomach, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. If you see that you are causing the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many ways; and if the sign does not appear soon, and the arrow is not in its place, then the wound will become worse, and it should be treated immediately.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of danger appears when the arrow pierces the bone and makes a hole in the shoulder, and the shock that is felt there is when scotomy, soreness, and dizziness, and fever, and pain and swelling in the limbs, and inflammation of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of the cold; and by chance it does not have nostrils or ears; and by chance it affects the speech and voice; and a sudden jump of the wound, white like pus, resembling a toothache; and if the sign appears to you, if you hold the cure, and extract the arrow if it is not in its place.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the shoulder when it pains or swells is that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it is becoming hard in something firm; and by chance the shoulder becomes as stiff as the leg, and in a short time black blood comes out, and there is cold and cold fever, and convulsion: then the signs of death appear.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the eye that has not been pierced is that there are no signs of swelling from the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the face is pale, and it sighs high and cries out in pain.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	When the arrowhead is in the shoulder covering, if it is close to the small ribs; and there is great pain and great suffering; and all the members of the arm move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead is in the stomach by chance, if it jumps out of the wound nothing digested from the meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead is in the belly by chance, and it jumps out of the intestine at one point, if there is no hope in the cure or the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead is in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes out suddenly, and the patient feels great pain: deadly wounds.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if the face and neck and shoulder and arm and elbow and spine of the back and ribs and muscles and legs, and the seeming member, are excepted according to other dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the flesh or vein, and it is not found, as I will tell you if I remember, because you are making it difficult.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to me once a arrow was in my shoulder: I tried to remove it, and it came out from another part of the fat of the ear, and it was easy to remove.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And then there was a case where an arrowhead entered the fat of the oil of ozone and paper of ozone, and the arrowhead was replied to, and it could not reach further than the point towards the other's neck, and it was as large as a Turkish bow, at all times making it light in weight for the ear; the patient was healthy, and never had any accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And then there was an arrow in the throat of a Moor, and it was the Arabian arrow with ears: I was the beards, and subtle as much as I saw it, and it was healthy for the Moors.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And there was a wound in the man's thigh or belly, and I thought he would die; but after three years, if it had not changed its position, I opened the wound, set the bone, and it healed, and there was no accident along the way.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if the man has a wound on his thigh or back, and it is infected; and the wound does not heal, and does not follow its natural dispositions, and does not find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if another man has a wound in his face, and it is infected; and the wound does not heal, and does not suffer great pain; and there are other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	The patient has a dislocation in the shoulder of the king, who had it for a long time and was slightly depressed on the left side; it was completely recovered after three years.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If you find the wound is tightly closed.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I gently probed it with my finger, and I did not feel anything; it felt pointed and painful on the left side of my ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow I put in the leg, because the leg did not swell; but I saw that it was the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I place the burning iron on the wound, and the right-sided pain subsides, as he feels the arrowhead in his shoulder; and he tells me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed the burning iron on the wound, and the wound became overgrown, and I extracted it, and I felt the head of the arrow that had been pushed into the shoulder; then I covered the wound with the burning medicine, as the patient's shoulder appeared visible to me; and it healed well in four months, and then I removed the thorns and the needles that I had inserted, and could not do otherwise; therefore, I continued to refine and invent ways to destroy it, as soon as I had properly inserted the thorns, according to its form as it appears at the end of this chapter, as I healed and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it accordingly, and the wound was soothing to the nose, and the malady was entirely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I told you about the quality of extracting some arrows, if you apply your care according to what I say, because the books cannot make everything appear pure; but the masters of the things make good use of few things, and of what is present and deficient, they do nine kinds of work, and nine instruments, in the descending of things drawn in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not issue from the members or they are made from flesh according to the following ways: either by the root or they enter, or by another part; and the one that is thrown by the hand or it enters, is an arrow that has entered into the flesh, and it will never be thrown again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	If she does not jump now, if she lets the char be burned through and through, and is not afraid of the issue; then she will get stuck in the bone, and she cannot move if she leaves any joints, and each joint; then she jumps, and if she jumps, if she perceives through all that the lear is slaggy, and then the trai.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the arrowhead is stuck in the bone of the shoulder, and it goes into one of the deep bellies, or any of the accidents I have mentioned to the barber: if it is not drawn out, but left as it is after a few joints, because the arrowhead comes out, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	1. If the dislocation is not in the bone alone, and does not cause any other problems, and there are no previous injuries that have caused damage, then the surgery will be successful.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. If the dislocation is not in its proper place and cannot be moved, then it should be reduced as soon as possible, as I have said before. Then, treat the shoulder until it is healthy again.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	3. If the dislocation cannot be seen, and one tries to feel it, and if it is not in any instrument that can be used for reduction, and if there is no pain or swelling in the shoulder, and the wound is not large, then reduce the shoulder as much as possible until the wound is healed. If the shoulder has visible dislocation, and the ears are held by the dislocation, and the bone is broken at the head of the humerus where you can see it, and then break or crush the ears of the shoulder, as much as you can reduce it, and do it gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you do not once, if the wound is still bleeding until it is clean, then treat it, for the extraction causes pain.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the dislocation does not move with the blood, if you do not follow what we have said in this chapter; and open the nerve and vein, and make an incision as you please to treat the arrowhead, either slightly or deeply, or firmly or loosely, and set the splint according to the shape of the arrowhead when it was removed, because it is the largest help that can be given, and if you do not, if you do not follow what we show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The first line translates to: "The arrow that came from another part, or it opens nothing of its own, or the skin is shrunk in a place where one can see or feel it: then it should be cut, as long as the thorns can hold onto it, and then it should be removed: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, if your hand turns around rapidly, as soon as it enters the bone, it widens the bone, then it should be pulled out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be drawn out, if it is left alone, and then the extraction resumes as soon as it is drawn out; and if it is a shaft and it is in the wood, if it is cut off at the end, and if it is a tool and it points towards the hair of the tool, and then it is cut, and if the shaft is hair, and it enters the tool's hair, then the tool is also cut at the point entering, to make the extraction easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrowhead is embedded, then you should cut through the entire arm or the poison is, and if you can, then treat the wound as best as you can.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the arrowhead is near the shoulder, abdomen, or lower belly, and it has pierced, and you can reach it, then cut it out; then cover the vein and nerve, and then remove it, and then cleanse the wound as best as you can; and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the points used to remove the arrows is similar to a beak of a bird, and it looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form of the pointed nail is like that of a spider's leg, to be inserted at the tip of the arrowhead, as follows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the nails to be driven and removed is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Of the veins that are healthy there are XXXI, of which XVI are the largest, which is to say: The two arteries that are after the ears, which are called the "herb-ears"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples apparant; and the veins that are in the two larnices, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is cut at the front; and the vein that is cut at the head of the nose; and the guindises that are or col; and the veins that are in the lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the veins that are least below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The first sentence to translate is: "Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The savable part is the vein that is between the auricula and anus, and if it swells; and in the leg, there are three veins: one is the corbule of the opposite side of the chest, and the second sophene which is at the ankle of the other chest; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg, there are three veins like these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The cure of the veins that are after the ears if it helps the old catheters and drains; and the quality of the safer, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the legs where the veins are of a rough cloth; then the patient's face becomes pale until the veins appear below the ears in the dependent part of the head: take this for your child, and when you feel the pulse of your child, if it is fast, then take the lancet, and cut through the vein jointly with the bone, then gently hold the hand over all the veins until the blood flows well, and make sure there is enough sand as you see; then tie and let it be, until it is safe; and I have already said the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	1. The health of the two arteries in the temples, if they are old, hardened, and accustomed to it, and if they are agitated by tears; and if they are as I say: and it is that the patient draws his collar tightly when the veins open widely; and he feels the cold of the hand on your thumb, and then it becomes numb; then gently press on the pulse above your thumb index, and remove the lancet, and gently hold the vein and the cut, as you have done in the other veins, and make sure to draw out enough blood according to your need; then remove the needle, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then form the wound, and leave it as long as it is healed; and we have spoken and of their extraction and their removal, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The patient's vein health is as poor as the face's ancient diseases and migraines, and the quality is if the medicine tightens its neck by twisting, as much as the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fissure", which is shaped like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and hold firmly with your hand or another object, and let the medicine pull out according to the amount you see; then tie the neck of the medicine with the thread as soon as it is safe and never use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	All that is needed is for the flames to be just right; and the safe way is to cross, because the bone is near, and by chance the flames break when they are being heated.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The health of the two veins that are in the armors if they help the wounds, and the groin, and the gout, and the rash in the oil, and the diseases of the face; and the quality of their health if it is that the patient draws his col with twisting no string, as before; then the safe way, and so the health of the veins, a small part large flame a wide, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	When the flames are subtle, by chance they are very sharp; then make sure to remove all blood, as much as you can, and then tie it off, and hold it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	If the wound of the thigh is not severe and does not get worse, and does not cause diseases of the face, and if there is no inflammation or pain that comes into the face; and if the cleanliness of the wound is that the cloth clings to the neck, then hold the wound in your left hand and take a subtle flame and light it on fire, and touch it to the eyelid that is between the two eyes, because the wound does not open very well and will now start to heal; do not apply too much pressure, and remove blood according to your need, then tie off all night, because it will be restored quickly; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	1. If the patient's wounds help in the healing of the body, and at the beginning of sewing, and in the prevention of diseases, and in healing, and in corroding, and in herpes, and estiomenes; and if the quality of the wound is that the physician strains his collarbone on both sides as we have said; and if the physician is standing at the head of the patient's bed, and the patient is lying down, then safely cut the vein for a long time, until it is large enough, then take out the blood flow, or as much as possible; then do another part in the other leg, then loosen the thread, and tighten the wounds so that the physician does not strain; and leave it until the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the rabbits
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the rabbits' mouths is helped to close in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and fangs of the lips, and pain and throbbing.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit before you, and pull on their collar as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the eyes, of which one is on the left side and the other on the right, and they are black, and have dark-colored veins: therefore, take each one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then take the largest of each part, and all of them make eyes that are sunken and cold, because it is a similar way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	From the disease of the throat, the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	When the throat is diseased, the tongue is affected; if aid is sought after the headache, and it is in the gorge, and there are diseases of the eyes, and diseases of the mouth; and you should know that this remedy is better when the patient's hands are before the sun, and the tongue is moistened, and looks at each side of a black vein: therefore both, and not too much, as these are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins that are commonly diseased are sane in two ways: either by touching all the fire with a wide flame, or with a subtle oil, and they are called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the fire cautery is such that it is not named after its name, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has the skill to open the veins of long hair with flat surfaces that contain large blood clots and cause trouble. And this is the form of the fire cautery, olive-shaped:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more skillfully pointed, and it is safer for the veins that are thin, or if there is thin blood in them.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The health of the basilican vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are dry in the throat, and in the collar, and in the stomach; and it is necessary for the physician to make it wise, and to avoid the artery that is dry.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	If the artery is pricked, and blood comes out, if it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said; and it should not be too tight with the fire, but cuts should be made like this.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the basin does not open clearly, and it is necessary to force it, and change another one; or you do not want any rain on it, or you want to open the vein with the arm: it will open clearly; and the fire should be applied like this that I have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	If you see the vein of the healthy one, and it is necessary to force the arm, and touch the vein as far as you can see the pulse; then make the vein swell, and then tie the arm, and open the vein with the fire like this that I have said: and be careful not to hurt the artery while you see the vein inflating, because it is the artery: close it quickly.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If you see coming out from the top as if it were the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, then know that it is not from the artery: haste to it, and put your hand far away, then watch your hand as it does not move, which many times happens; let go of the shoulder, and do not move it until it is safe; and so be careful, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	2. If it is not stained, and it hurts, and the doctor is not present, then if the artery is open, because the head of the return; and subdue it.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	1. Take a scalpel from the fistula, and make it sharp, and take one of the halves and tie it well with the other part; if it is not slippery, it is good; if not, then the cure, as we have said, of the powders that make it slippery; the slips are not more gripped in other positions for the small wound of the wound, and the pain of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	1. The health of the vein is in good condition if it can treat the wound with salve from basil and hearth, as we have said; and it must be washed with the nerve that is dry, and if it does not become too much in the forehead, and it dries the nerve, and it swells and the health becomes gripped, and by chance it cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open any holes for its subtlety, then it must be washed with the instrument of the scissors; and dry the nerve on your body.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is blood between the two veins, if it is long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment of the head if it helps, that it attracts blood to the head, and helps the wounds; and it is the best to touch with olive oil or with wine, because it is the most safe of all wounds, because it does not harm the nerve or the artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Indeed, it is best to make the incision more lightly, and do not harm anyone the first time, and resume; and by chance, the blood may flow to some men, but it does not harm anyone the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your perception.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about health is that it is not lost unless you want to keep it and avoid diseases coming; and the health should be made in one of the three veins: the head, fast, and the basilica; and it should be done at the beginning of the first part of the day, and in the evening and in the night after meals, when the sign of repletion appears; and it should be done on the first or the third day, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The health that is lost has diseases without a specific determination, but when it comes to cravings for food or drink, in all hours and every ten; and it is not necessary to have health for children under the age of 14, nor for women who are only carrying a quarter of a year old.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Ne, they should not be too healthier those who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then, if they appear healthier than usual, if they have lighter intestines due to a clistere legion, if they have enough fat retained, if the vowels do not have unnecessary harmful intestines; and if they are too much of meat or yew, as soon as they eat, and dehydrated, and after colic passion, vomiting, and abdominal discomfort, and many women's menstruation, and frequent urination, and sleeplessness and hunger, and whatever the virtue, or by something of the arm or cold; then subtly the humors, if it is not too large, by meat and drink and medicines, if you can afford it; then take a bath, nothing harms, to deflate the sac, and make yourself healthy from the vowels, and from the third of the third, as we have said; and keep away from work, and pleasure, and luxury, and such things; and be married and joyful, and be healthier than those who are sick, and rub your arms twice or three times, then tightly draw the line, because if it is too thin or weak, you cannot bear it without; then rub the legs with oil as much as the vowels burn, then put your hand in the other hand on the vowels of the leg unto a pocket of fat, and put your thumb on the vowels of the leg unto a pocket of fat, where the vowels do not hurt; and if you have sore throat, rub it with a little ointment, and put your hand on the vowels of the neck unto a pocket of fat, and put your thumb on the vowels of the neck unto a pocket of fat, where the vowels do not hurt.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that run like cords in the healthier, and if they are too many, then when one is put on fire, it draws back from the fire, and cannot open the vein, and then it is one of these; and if the vein is opened, if the wound is too tight, for this it is necessary that the physicians be advised in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, then it continues a little more of that same part or by force, and if it does not open, it is because it is too tight.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	If the patient is short-sighted and the wound becomes infected, and the arm is left alone for one or two days, and does not enter water, then it will heal if it pleases; and if the wound is small, or the flesh is not cut subtly and you doubt that it will not become infected as much as you have seen, then you should dress it with ointment every day, even if the wound is small, because this has happened many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the wound swell, if you do not relieve it and put a little ointment on it, because it softens the chest of the pain, and it becomes dry in this wound that the oil lies; and you should apply oil to the wound every time you heal the wounds, to strengthen the course of the pain; and this itself makes a trip and bow when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	1. If large abscesses appear, which often recur, and at the same time the wound is only slightly opened, and you haste, and moisten a sponge with cool water and a little salt on it, and draw it over the limb for an hour; and it is necessary to do this after the evacuation of blood from the wound, and if the limb remains at the wound for no time or no darkness or discoloration, if you do not know why; and if you see, do not put anything on it of aloes or ointment reheated in warm water, mustard, or like.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is infection and appearance of the health of the basilica: put then your hand on, and if you feel the bone move under the compression of the hand, that is the appearance of malformation.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Be careful that you do not put on anything else of what we have said, because by chance in the cort without the artery; but I make it wet to endure the bone, then another cure until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each sin according to its quantity of virtue, and its color of sin.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is black, let it be red as long as it is rosy; and if you see it large, let it be as long as it is subtle; and if it is too hot, let it be cooled.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	1. It is necessary for those who are in pain and fear, and have skill in extracting poison, to make a larger wound, and use wide flaps; and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is healthier and more often, and it should be made healthier by cutting across, not by pricking; and this way of healing is saved from the dislocation of poison and the weakness of nerves, and it is worthwhile that the healed wound is not wide but long.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	1. And for the one whose heart needs healing, it is necessary to give moist bread made from red pomegranate juice; if it is cold, three times or four times as much blood, and if it is of a cold complexion, before the healing bread, give moist bread made from honey with aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-smelling honey.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it comes into contact with the clean part after the evacuation of blood, if it becomes wet and smells like charcoal and sweet odor, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter of sinusitis for the evacuation of pus.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it sees the vein exit and become cleaner, and it happens, when it is impeded by a large amount of cleanliness, that it becomes clean little by little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who sees the vein exit after the first cleanliness, and it is strong, that it becomes clean in seven hours after the first cleanliness, or after the next hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever appears to be healthier from another perspective, if it is necessary to be healthier the following day or the next.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because the patient has a fever from a cold that has already been caught, and the chest becomes inflamed as it expands; then when you reward all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the pulse as soon as it becomes healthy, so that the death does not come from pneumonia, and this happens many times when the healthier ones are neglected; and it is necessary to see if the arm becomes sweaty, and to let the sickness drain the second time, and the chest is closed, so you must press on it; but if it is cold, then extend the arm as quickly as possible, because it would be wrong; but leave it until it is healthy the second time; or if you do not reach the tip of the flame, when the cold that has frozen the chest's veins is about to come out, and put your finger on the wet cloth that has been put in the fire, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, and it is left without being compressed as much as possible, until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood twice, whether in the same vein or in another, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy because it is composed of the main vein of the shoulder.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And if the vein is injured, and the patient pours hot water over it until the wound is red; then it should be tied tightly, if the vein appears well, then the blood flows through it, not too wide or too long; and the wound should be wide, and near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be stopped, it should be reapplied to the hand with hot water, until enough has been applied; and if this is done, do not apply hot water to the hand more than necessary, as it can cause more harm than good; and the vein from this wound is safer than all other veins, because it has not been harmed or frozen.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	1. The health of the saved hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is the way: wrap the hand with warm cloth, as long as the vein is cold, if you can; and if it is not, then cut across, and if you do not hurt it at all, then do not cut too deep, because the skin is bare of hair and wool, and then put the hand back in warm cloth, if it does not freeze in the wound, and it cannot issue.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	2. And when you have treated as much blood as it is your duty to do, if you put the vein oil and seal with a bandage, and then make one for each rain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The patient with the hand on the left side is suitable for the disease of the mouse, and I do everything as I have said towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The health of the sophene is suitable for all diseases that are full of the chest, like other diseases of the ribs, and retention of flowers, and disease of the lungs, and of the knees and ankles, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of his health is that the patient suffers from feverish cold, and wipe the vein as it bleeds, and press on the joint of the piercing; and the vein if it is at the ankle, and through the piercing into the rain of the knees; thus the rain is healthy or larger, or at the ankle, which is worth.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you clean the wound with your clean hands, if it is full of filth and dust, and the wound is wide; and let the fire burn.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if you cannot remove it with your fingers alone, put the wound in a bucket of cold water and let it be well drained.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the wound becomes infected for the first time, if it recurs in a second place, because the leeway is salty; do not doubt of nervousness, as we have said, and then make a solution of sorrel with another piece of cloth.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leeway of the joint is at the ankle, and its pain is like the pain of the hip, when it is inflamed.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of his health if he is subjected to water or bathing, and draws out his ankle IV times by twisting, as otherwise it will not open the vein; and if it opens, then the healthy in all ways that you can, and crosswise; and it is better to cover it, for the wound is safe and it is returned to the hands of men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not cover it, then the healthy no rain of the one who opened or not deep, and towards the little door, and you wear the needles; and make so much blood that you see, and then cut off the string, and put on cotton and draw; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	Of ventricles of the brain
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventricles are made of horn, or iron, or silver; and ventilation can be done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing out blood, or by cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	This ventilation which is done by cutting is done in two ways: either it is all fire, or hot; and ventilation which is made by cutting and extracting blood is done in twelve different places of the head, where some are all the chief, and others are the collarbone; and the others are in the costal cartilages; and the ventilations of the menton; and the ventilations of the two shoulder blades; and the ventilations of the crupies; and the ventilations of the two arms; and the ventilations of the two legs; and the ventilations of the two ankles; and this ventilation does not touch any veins that are scattered in the flesh, for which reason no harm is done to the patient, as we do with wounds; and it only remains to make sure that it is not all fire or hot, in any disease that comes from repletion, as long as the chest is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	1. If necessary for diseases, or due to habits, if the patient feels unwell at the beginning of each month, or at the end, and also in each ten days; for there are those who, when they have to vomit, weigh a lot; and if such people experience fullness and burning in their face, and in their cheeks, and at the collarbone, and become pale; and those who experience a chill in their stomach, and lose their tongue, and vomit sour liquid; and if there are those who feel dizzy, and see only sour liquid, and blood, and death, and strange things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we saw these signs, and also when it is after three hours in the month, we command him to rest.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sauce of the face helps to alleviate the pain of the head … that comes with the eyes, and it is only after the evacuation of all the blood; and this resting is in the use of the sauce of the facial, and it is only for those who have a cold complexion or are chapped, because this does great harm; and therefore it is only for the watchmen to use, and those who have cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal, if they become incapacitated, and for this it is necessary to put the ventouse further away due to the fear of incapacity.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventouse on the neck is in the chest of the healthy chief and the basilica, and for this it is valuable in the distension of the pis, and for the fencing of the chenal of the stomach and intestines, and to all, and for repletion; and it is necessary to put it in a little, because if it holds too tightly, it can cause incapacity or stomach or intestine.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventouse on the neck is valuable for the costelz of the collar, causing pain in the chief, and obtalmie and emigrainne, and estranglement, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the chest of the healthy basilica; and it is necessary that you command the patient to express his hand when putting it on, not to cut the artery, and not to cause dislocation of the sanc.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The windings of the throat are not good for diseases of the mouth, and corruption of the genitals, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the lesions of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders are good for diseases that come from chills and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windings of the elbows are as good for diseases of the large veins in the arms as the third fingers; and instruct the patient not to force too much, because it is unnecessary and can cause nerves and arteries to be damaged.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The first sentence to translate is: "Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	1. The forceps of the legs are healthy when they open widely, as they draw blood from the entire body, alleviate old pains from rain, menstruation, and bladder, and reduce swelling in the feet; they are located near the second toes and can cause the body to weaken over time with prolonged use, leading to various disorders.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	1. If you place the forceps correctly, and continue doing so until you see the red and swollen limb, and the pain subsides, then close the forceps and take care of the position of the body, as some people have weak legs and small pores: if you injure once, it will heal and leave a slight wound, and it should be gently touched.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	If the joint is not large, it will be injured twice: once to make the vein subtle.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If the joint is very precise, it will be injured three times: once to make the vein small and small. And when we want to treat the vein little by little, only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	If we want to remove a lot of blood, we often return; and if the joint is not precise, if it is too deep, and if the ends are perceived slightly, and for those who have thick skin and hardness, and who have rough edges, you must oil the ventouses aperitif and dissolvent with olive oil: if it is in this way, with olive oil of violet, or with olive of sweet almonds, or with olive of cucurbite seed; and if it is in wine, with oil of parsley, or with thyme, or with chamomile, or other similitude.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take olive oil, or balsam, or anise oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the part that is affected by the cold and wide pores, it should not be oiled, but it should be washed after the vinegar rinse, or the cold rinse, or the mushroom rinse, or the cucumbers rinse, or the porcelain rinse, or another similar one.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And that which has sweat, if it rises with oil, or vinegar of myrrh, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those who have excessive superfluity rise from wine vinegar, or from ague of sweat, or from decoction of anet or chamomile, or from other similar things; and they are not healthier before bathing than after, but rather an hour or two after bathing; and they do not sleep before ventilation, and they must ventilate when they need to and when they are ventilated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And if those who are healthy become irritated, and their mouth is too dry and inflamed; then it comes that they need to consume cold things, like green apples and endives and leafy vegetables, and similar things; and they drink punctions, and char of chafing, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	The patient with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup if they are thirsty, and wine that is between vinegar and wine, which is between little and much, and milk, cheese, and pears and pines; and when they start to feel better, they must drink more wine than water; and it is recommended to give some men a triangular or muscle exercise before or after the ventilation, to comfort the main members; and it should be done subtly, but only those who are cold should drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The bellies that are made sore are those that are made sore in the stomach, and in the liver, and rheumatism, and in the stomach and bowels, and in the gallbladder and kidneys, for this member does not suffer much pain in the sides, and only feels it when it draws blood from one part to another, as we do with the breasts when they are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we make ventouses on the stomach and bowels to sweeten the member; and to relieve the pain, whether it has opilliation or piercing, if it is relieved by its own virtue attracting the opilliation, or if it leaves the piercing of the limb, and these ventouses are given empty to suck only; and they are never given together with fire, and never with aqueous tede, as in diseases that cause much crying, and in such a way that one fills the ventouse with hot water, or with water that has been cooked with herbs that are beneficial.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the vacuum device administered by fire is:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two large and half palms of width, and has a small pocket on the outside of the mileau I petit pertus, as if to stick an arrow, and has a groove of iron or steel in front so that it does not scratch the patient's member; and in the mileau has a hole for a chain or wire to be inserted, and there are large and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who take them, because the vacuum devices of children are different from viels, and are thinner than fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	1. And it must be placed around the member with this device: take the wax candle or liniment, and insert the vent into the groove that is in the vent, so that it glows at the end of the vent where it does not burn the patient; then place it on the member, and you must place it as we have said, if you see that it produces vapor when you look, and if you remove the vent; and take the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you can.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	1. In the vent that is in the patient who is sick with copious phlegm, without any fever or wheezing, and is only sick when it is clear that it has a cold, and is placed around the member only; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	1. Scissors are not usually used except in parts of the body where small incisions can be made, such as the lips and genitals, and similar places; and in parts where hair is thick, such as the eyebrows and eyelashes, and other parts; and the quality of the scissors depends on whether you can find smooth-skinned goosebumps that are easy to pinch, if you can; and then place a needle in a smooth-skinned goosebump, as long as it is not pregnant, and has nothing in the belly; and then clean the wound and the belly, and then remove the pins, and then place the pins on the smooth-skinned goosebumps; and when they are flat and smooth, and turn red, and put them on, and when they are flat and smooth, and turn red, and put them on, if it is possible to pinch the belly, then it is better to do so.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	1. If not, then raise the leg of the affected side, then the thigh; and if the patient is too ill after the surgery, then soak it in cold water, and wrap it with linen, as long as the wounds are not inflamed; and if the wounds become inflamed, then put on vitrol or galls, and similar things, as long as they are inflamed; or you can cut the leg in half from the knees, and leave them as they are on the leg until they dry out now; and if you have more to do, then take other affected parts.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the wounds do not take on the salve, if you rub the wound with warm oil or thread as much as it will absorb, and then put it on, and as soon as they feel the heat, if you powder some aloe and silk or sand, or dust, now they will stick.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they deal with fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	I advise you to pay attention to this chapter, as you will not find any examples in the old books, nor letters; and this is why science has been neglected in our land, because I have never found any book on the subject; and I do not know of any, except perhaps through the science of the old books, or through my own study and treatment of the science, and through experiment, and through the habit of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and summarized it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the fractures that have been produced, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say at the beginning of this book the sum of words and chapters or sentences where the meaning is put, and they learn the truth, if those who have experienced it understand and learn this noble art, and learn to teach others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when there is any breakage, dislocation, twisting, or tightening, if it comes to any part of the patient's body, nothing should be taken away unless something else is affected, whether it be a wound, or a fracture, or a dislocation; or if it is not very tense, or too loose; and if it is too cold, it means cold drinks, and ice and velvet, and does not drink any wine, nor take in too many thin drinks, and does not fill the veins with blood, as long as there is no doubt of anemia, or expansion of matter in the member; if the patient's condition improves after the first governance he used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that cause large swelling, or viscosity, such as wheat cooked in vinegar, and tested, and peeled, and pains in the cheese, and oefz, and fish fresh, and big wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For part of the swelling is regained and more quickly the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And you advise that the bones broken and decrops do not regain or heal according to their nature due to the shortening of the limbs, and those who are too soft, like that of small children; but no cure, reset the broken bone with large tenrons that are sawn and joined to the limb as it was before; and do not leave it too long, and for this reason it is necessary to avoid large amounts of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you know that fractures come in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the skull is different from the fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you all the ways of fracture in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that can be seen and others that cannot, like the size of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture is a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each fracture has its own way and instrument for restoration, according to what remembrance comes to the bone; and it is known that the fracture of the bone is by what the hand holds, and is open well by defeat, and some are pressed by the hand; and if it is not twisted or has no pain in the hand, there is no fracture, but it may have twist, or cut, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you cannot manage to move it with your hand alone, but bring the medicine that comes after, and then gently extract it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And examine the fracture that will occur in the wound, and the two parts that are separated. It is now appropriate to put them back together as evenly as possible, unless they are causing pain; and if they cause pain and come out, then it should be left alone until the pain subsides, and then it should be gently placed in its original position and examined to see if the restoration of the bone is lighter than the restoration of the pieces; then it is extracted, as it was done here after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	1. And if in the bone of the foot, if it is broken into two parts, it is hands or fingers, or a part of your hand is small limbs, or two cords, or one cord and your hand; and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are adjusted, if you reset with your fingers the additions in their place in the muscles that you please, and keep that by your effort does not cause the surgical wound or pain; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	2. And it feels good to the hand if it seems that it is not well: if it bends beautifully, and does not strain too much, do not press as they do who come by their effort, aposteme chaut and contraction at the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	When the joint is painful, if the patient keeps it still, neither by day nor by night, nor when turning, nor in any other way, then the joint should be secured so that it does not cause any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when there is no pain, if it is not yet time to reset the joint, then it should be put in proper alignment so that there is no pain; and keep it in place until the injured limb is fully restored; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I will describe.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	There are various types of fractures, small and large, in size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For if it has bitten members, like meat and drinks and similar things: if it comes with entrails of linen and fine threads; and those that are large, like leather and leg: if it comes with a wide and hard ribbon, for the large ribbons embrace all the great member, and draw it evenly, unless it has no tail; then it is lightly wounds, three or four times around the member, and the hand is tightly tied to every part of the ribbon, then go to the end of the fracture and draw it less, that the fracture may slightly move the part of the healthy bone; and soften the ribbon a little and a little, as you please to take a large part of the healthy flesh, then put another ribbon, and turn the wound right side up on the broken bone; then go back to the part opposite the fracture, and draw it gently, not too much nor too little, as we said in the first part of the fracture; then put between the wounds of linen or threads as much as it is even, then tie all with a knot, and then put your good stitches on, if it has not had an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	If it is inflamed or infected, if you put something soothing on the infected area that stops the inflammation and leaves it undisturbed; then tie your eyes with something like a wide piece of twine, or a rope, or a palm branch, and it should be tied in this manner:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the bandage placed on the wound be larger and broader than the others; and should also be as long as the size of the member; then tie your eyes in the same way as you did in the first part, then tie a thread around it just like you did in the first part, but make sure it is not too tight; the more stretched it is, the less it will be; and the thread should be smooth, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of linen; for if the thread is too thick, as I have seen the works of fools who tie their knots with linen threads, it can cause great harm, because the knot cannot be equal if it is too fine, and only makes it possible that there is less space between each eyelet than a piece of spice.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is relieved by the head of the arrows after the extraction in healthy ones, if they are left without sores of linen, or silk, if it does not freeze.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bandage, and the edges are torn, I will tell you the cure for this afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And beware that it is not difficult to break all the limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not easy to put on arrows after the first day or seven days, or according to your strength; and in this way the ancient methods of restoring breaks, dislocations, and twists: and that you take flour that is held within the walls of the mills, and mix it with a great deal of beer, and make this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of restoring breaks in other positions, as well as for women and small children, because it is not too hard or too weak.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	1. Other ways of plastering to repair fractures and dislocations and twists: take pumice and linen and oil and Arabian gum and mugate, in equal parts; marble and aloe, in equal parts; alechil in equal parts; and make a powder, and mix with the fat of urine; if the complexion of the face is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and rests the broken bones quickly, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	1. Other ways of plastering for twists: take Arabian gum and vinegar, in equal parts; marble and aloe, in equal parts; acacia, in equal parts; arsenic from Armenia, in equal parts; mix well, and cook with water or the fat of urine, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to burn is on joints and bones, and soothes the pain that follows, and reduces the size of the bone: take fresh oil, and the milk en suet and cooked, and put it on the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not repair, but they are good for soothing inflammation and bone pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to burn that repairs broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth pottery, and bundle them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to burn for the repair of bone fractures and to reduce inflammation.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	1. Take the root of malva, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of violets, and each part; and boil, and strain with wine, and wash the limbs with fresh coriander water, or with cold water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	1. Another way to wash more thoroughly than the first, when the abscess is deep and comes to restore the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	1. Take the roots of malva, and linseed meal, balm, honey, and sugar, and each part; and boil, and strain with fresh or sweet vinegar, or wine, according to the chill of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that one should not put the broken bone member in a position to restore it as if it were made of clay and oil, and nothing more, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems that Galien says one should put the broken bone member in a position to restore it, using things that are dry and warm, such as mustard and aloe and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to show what is good for the wound and pain: take a piece of raw meat, or the tail of an ox, and a thorn, and sew it, and the limb, and then apply it to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the patient will feel better a little later, and take care not to cause pain or discomfort to the bone of the limb; if it does not improve by hand pressure, and pain comes to the bone, or itching, or swelling, if you hurry, and remove it, and now apply the plaster; then gently dampen a cloth, wet with sea water, dip in cold water, and lift the limb until the itching stops and the pain subsides; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, moist or oily rosewater, and put on a bandage, as long as you are sure not to have an attack of gangrene; then allow the inflammation in the member to subside, and soothe the pain, and then resume the light touch, and a little plaster, and do not strain it too much; and gradually until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the incision is painful and has blood, swelling, and inflammation, and you have skill in plastering and bandaging, if it recurs, as you did at first, do the same.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If you do not see any worsening of the joint for three days or four or five or seven days, and never more than twenty days, as soon as the swelling approaches the chariot; therefore, the restraint is more than before, and the flesh grows larger, as I said earlier; and if you see the joint becoming drier than it should be, do not let the wounds become worse than they can be, and take care to keep the fire hot every time you dress the wound, and do it every day, and put a little oil on the cloth; in this way, you will cut off the fire from the joint, and stop what the flesh does, which makes the joint painful: this is bad, and if it does not improve, I know of no other remedy than to have patience and treat it with due care.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various kinds of wounding
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of wounds are there, and various shapes, and their causes are assigned; for there are wounds made by the impact of a spearpoint, and the whole bone is shattered as if it were wood, like when cut with an axe or saw; and therefore this kind of wound is called "axe-wound".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	The spear pierces the bone through various senses and is called this kind of wound "absolute"; and these are the wounds of those two great or small gashes.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it has an impact that is embedded, or pierced, or from the cut of the wound, or from the cut under the wound, or from other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a persistent fracture, which approaches the tissue that is loose from the bone, or it is placed on the bone, and this wound or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	If the wound is repaired in the bone as subtle as possible, and it is a small cut, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound is made by injury, or by piercing, or by seeming thing, and forces the piece of bone to enter, and it is the same as when they were heating the caustics when they burned the caustics; if it enters the piercing.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And there are more cases where the shoulders have soft bones, like that of a child; and they occur in all these ways of fracture that are light and easily broken, like these; and I will speak to you in his language.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we shall examine all the ways of fractures caused by the blows that have been given, and by the crooked one that has been made, and by the char that has been corrupted.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the fracture is known by this, that when one has discovered the bone, and has rubbed around it, if the black fracture is not wide open.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, keep a close watch on the patient, and if you see no mishap from the surgeon, if it is not like vomiting of bile, and admission of understanding, and extension, and manipulation, and fever, and the wounds turning and reddening, and other signs of more severe cases, if it cannot be cured with doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see an accident, and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When you first come across the bone, and it is in the shoulder, then it is necessary to open the bone before the fourth month of the mouse, that you may do.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this is the case, and you hope to open the bone before the ninth month of the mouse, then the cloth that covers the bone must be rotten, and the accident we have mentioned will come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes near the cloth that covers the bone, then it is necessary to sell the cut part: and it is that you press the patient's shoulder with the knife, and open the bone in all the ways you can, and open the wound in its figure more than you can, and if the poison comes out to discover the bone, or if it is a gangrene, then help it as it is necessary, and it is that you fill the joint with oiled powder; and let the wound rest until the poison is calmed and secured against displacement; then begin to open the bone, and it is done according to two ways of incision: one way is when you cut at the narrow end, and it is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I cut it in another, larger piece than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is if you have many different sizes, some pointed and others wide, and they are sharp, and are made of iron; and they can be lightly carved, without cutting the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and thick, it comes to pass that you perceive it, rather than carving it with tools, as long as you use carving tools with care, and do not force them too far into the bone, and must have a margin or circle around the point that does not pass over the bone; and you must have more tools, if each time you see the bone in your hand according to its thickness, if you have tools for each test; and this is the form of the three ways of carving:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The first line of the translation is: "To check for fracture at the end of the bone, put pressure on the bone, and turn it as much as you can until you feel that the bone is perceived; then remove the pressure a little later, and then do the rest, and cut through the bone's edge that is between the holes, making it as subtly and lightly as possible, and gently, so that you do not touch the brain or the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perceived and cut the bone, if the incision covers the entire bone as it is made with an instrument resembling a chisel, but it should be more thin and subtle than the other incision; and if it does not remove any small bones, nor any scales, if the lighter bones are scratched on the extremities; then cure the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of opening is when it is said that the Galenic method is more reliable; and the more forceful, and that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, where the fracture is open and exposed, so that once you have removed this part, measure from the center of this incisional lenticular curve, which is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut too much, and the part is cut away in two pieces if the cutting is towards the bone; then, using a small saw, if you lightly touch the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is exposed; if it touches the bone, as it is well known, it causes great pain, and can cause fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	1. If the bone fracture does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only crushed by itself, and it has small pieces, then those rough edges must be covered with something to smooth out the scales, which you should have several quantities of, to accommodate each joint according to its type and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	1. If you use coarse razors first, and then gradually switch to softer ones, and continue doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	1. In each of the other haircuts and subtle fractures, you must accommodate according to its address; and this is something that cannot be undone by the one who studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	When the scar is discovered, if it is necessary to pregness and drape the wound according to the size of the wound, and oint with rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another doubled bandage of II or III, and oint with wine and rose oil, and place it over the first bandage; and do this more lightly than you please, so as not to burn the scar, then apply by other linen, and do not strain it too much, only until the wound is healed; and leave it for I day or II, as long as the swelling is pacified, then remove it, and administer medicines like these: roots of lis, flour of times, powder of incense, aristolochum, and similar things; and make a powder from these things and place it on the wound, and administer further medicines without mordication; and when the wound is clean, do not leave the ointment or assemble bowels, for if bowels are assembled under the skull, they will cause great pain to the patient; for if something mouth-rending is placed on the wound, it will cause great malice to the patient.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	If no accidents happen to the patient, if no one doubts the sense of the matter, then it is doubtful.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no one comes for help but only through medicine that has been given, then it is necessary to have part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one part of glue, and mix them with soap; then the cure is performed in the ways of cures that are given, as long as it is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	It is said that the two parts of the joint are never broken, or only one, because they are bones; and it is in cartilage, and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it becomes healthy.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should cut off the small digit or pertus and place it evenly on your index finger, and in the pouch as long as it does not reveal according to its natural figure; and do this lightly, and let the patient feel no pain through your touch.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part of the nail, and cannot reach the toe, then you should place it evenly at the end of a large finger's nail.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in the second part, then you should redo the first nail, and hurry to restore the first one, if you can; if not, after the ninth or tenth time, when the wound is calmed, then cut off the end of the nail with a blade of linen, if the break is in a part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If you cut one part, the other will also be cut; and if they are large, they fill the cavities with pus.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And no restorer would say that one must file the cut edges, and each hour.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It seems to me that this is well, but they must be filed in the making of bone marrow and powdered milled; then leave the edge, until the bone is cold and the cartilage hardens.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And no time is it cut on or the wings of geese in the shoulder of the edges, and if it is too loose and hangs the bracelet, and smokes the drug among; or do as you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess is inflamed, it comes to the nose while you work, if it puts on a cloth or cotton that is well greased with oil of rosemary, or in a pot of vinegar.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess does not come, if it puts on ointment made of flour of mustard and incense powder, melted with lamb's wool, then put on light sponge pieces, and do not bind the nose tightly; and if the nostril opening is small, and it is broken into small pieces, if the stitches are comfortable for this, then cut off the fringe, and the treatment of things enchanted charms, and soldering, if like ointments and plasters that are suitable for this; and if there is no wound on the nose, but it cures with tents, and puts on nail-like sponges, as long as it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the dislocation of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is dislocated, there is no wound, and the break is not deep, only slightly so, and it is not broken into pieces, but rather like a nail, if you know how to do it gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right side of the mandible, to place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left side of the mandible, then place your index finger on the left hand, gently press on the break, and hold it with the other hand until it heals.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the lower jaw is divided into two parts, and it comes to your notice that you need to extend the second part equally, then do so.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth move or break, or there is inflammation, then take a gold or silver thread and sew it around the broken lower jaw, and then double-stitch it; and take a long, wide piece of leather or a piece of cloth that fits the jaw, and sew it to the mouth that you are sewing, and instruct the patient to lie down, and give him light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, and if it does not change in three days, then re-fix it to where it was before; and apply a plaster with flour from the mill or wheat flour, after you have osteit the cerote; and apply a lighter plaster on top, and let it dry when it is moist, and the position of the patient does not change, as long as he is healthy; it remains healthy for three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	If the abscess is inflamed, then it comes to gangrene, as we have often said.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, a small piece of bone is broken off in the joint; if the bones are slightly crooked, it can be adjusted.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is wide, let it widen according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have all the bones in place, and there is no pain, if the wound is wide, let it be large, and insert emplausteres made of crooked bones as needed, until it is healthy.
de la forcele	From the force of
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks it many times against the shoulder, towards the elbow, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and cut into two, and it has pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or it is a cut with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the opening is when the break is in contact with the wound, if you have two assistants, so that the one tends to the dislocated shoulder that feels the force of the break; and the other extends your collar towards the part; then place the break between your two fingers, so that it forms as it should, and has no appearance or deviation.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have more to extend, if you place the shoulder bone of the patient at the masseter with a round or flat bead made of linen or wool, and it is large according to your need; and hold and gently apply force, and draw the bead to your hand so that you can even out the fracture, as it is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you do not cut off the head of the force, because it comes too early, and the patient's arm is in pain, and place the shoulder bone at the ear, and bind the spine with a string, as long as the bone of the force is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture to your two bones, and if you can remove the fragments, then sell them; and take care of the light pieces, and if the bone does not join by any means with the one of the incisions you made, but put aside the force of this instrument for the sake of the face:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not very sharp, and should be as large as it can, according to the size of the bone and the force of the blow; and if it is two, as you see, and some are wide, and others are narrow, if it is the fracture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of the hemorrhage, if the wound is small, or you doubt hemorrhage, if you use linen and bandages, according to their quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if you have pain in the joint and it comes, then mix oil of rosemary and vinegar and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And when you have pain in the bone and it comes, then mix oil of rosemary and vinegar and wine, and apply it. Then take a large piece of palm leaf, and double the sponge on the leaves, and press; then take a small sponge of III dois de large and long, and wrap it around the bendeil, so that the bendeil's end remains; and put the sponge under the bendeil, and turn the bendeil at the col, and soak the healthy bone, and soak the injured bone; and tighten each part, and when you see that the briseure holds the break, and you see clearly that the sponge does not move from the bone break, then each time you reward it with a jor, and when it wakes up, if it has a small orillier of vinegar on the asselle, put the malaide on its back, and it will lift the helper to the top; if you straighten the fracture by the elbow's alignment or by pulling the arm to the col, and it does not slip out of accident, then in XX jors, resume the application, if you see that it has merit, and leave it and let it be, until it is restored; and it is restored in the most in XXVIII jors, and in no fewer than any man.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the injury to the elbow
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	If the elbow breaks or becomes loose in the arm and does not heal on its own, and if the bone is displaced, then it should be reduced according to the shape of the fracture, and then powdered sulfur with a lot of urine should be sprinkled on the arm, and light splints, and then a wide but thin splint, which is larger than the elbow, should be placed, and if necessary, a linen wick should be used to secure it; then the splint should be tightly tied once every time it moves, so that the splint does not move from its place, and watch the line every time it loosens, and whenever it relaxes, and if it is loose, and replace the splint as soon as it returns to its place, and the elbow will be recovered in 20 or 25 days; when these numbers are completed, if it heals well, and you are sure, because this is only lightly placed.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone is found to be broken, and it is not cut, then the bone, and we do what we have said in the fracture of the force of relieving abscess pain.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the piece
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is never broken in the environment, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks in the impact.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in pieces, if it is cut at the edge, and the patient feels great pain, and there is no movement, and then, by chance, vomiting of blood, and the wounds are opened in the broken bones, and it seems well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration is if the patient feels pain on his back, and he places a compress between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the second rib in your hands, and subtly puts them equal to all ways that you can, until the bone appears as it should; then put on bandages and poultices around the broken bone, if another lighter one is used, or other legger, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another lighter one, and wraps it in a gentle layer of salt, or another light
de la brisure des costes	Of the breast wound
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The wounds of the breast come from large blows after the back, and at the top of the shoulders, and they do not plough well because they are greasy; and it is felt to be quite good in the investigation as it should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restorations are if you let the wound grow evenly as it should.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put the plaster, and draw it tight with a staple, if you have the strength.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the wound of the breast is inclined towards the shoulders, and it causes great pain and throbbing, as if from tears, because the bone does not touch the skin; and it is stitched, and often vomiting great amounts of blood, and this is due to the loss of health, and the old ones have put in great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	If it is said that it should be administered meat that inflates the belly, by fastening the girdle around the waist.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, that the patient does not live if it is not given.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, then it is good.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And no one says that you put gauze on the leg, to suck it out, and it seems right; however, doubt and I know that the gauze does not draw out the excess from the leg by its position of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And no one says that you should cover the leg with oiled cloth and put tents between the ribs to measure the hour accurately, then treat the pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure through the bone that does not pierce the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut on the side of the broken rib, and to put aside an instrument to hold the face; and therefore it must be the bone that is torn, and then sew the edges of the wound lightly, if it is large, and cure it with plasters, as long as it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if an abscess comes out, then put on soft cloths greased with olive oil, and on the wound; and treat while the leeward side of it comes out, and it is necessary to gently press on the costal side or where it must be, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	The first sentence to translate is "de la brisure dou col". The translation
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	The second sentence to translate is "Aucune fois vient briseure d'os de colonne, et poc avaint k'il plorie; et aussi à l'espinée de la dos". The translation is: "No time comes of a fracture of the vertebrae, and rarely does it happen; and also to the spine of the
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	Et quant ce arrive à aucun, et tu vois savoir s'il sera saine ou non, si prendre warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiées et enfleées et mortes, et ne les peux pas mouvoir ni estendre, et quant tu les touches d'une aguille, si ne lou sent. The translation is: "And when this happens to none, you see whether it will be healthy or not, if you take warde and see your hands softened and swollen and lifeless, and you cannot move or stretch them, and when you touch them with a needle, if it does not hurt.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if you take care of your bones, and if the accidents are which are in hands, and how the lower back jumps and evacuates willingly; and when you have soothed it with your stomach, if it jumps and evacuates willingly.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is soothed on the back and it sees it is swollen, if it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	If a wound is not treated properly, it can become fatal.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen, it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if the treatment is successful, if it has not caused an abscess, put on oil of rose or oil of mustard, as long as it is calmed; then put on a comfortable plaster and bandage, and tie it with a string, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where you feel the pain, as long as you are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bones are dislocated, put on a bandage around the knee; and then set the bone, and assemble the two sides of the wound as much as possible in a straight line, and the treatment is to apply ointment with calm, as long as it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the bone," take your left hand pouch and put it on the other hand's palm, then put on the plaster and bandage, as you are used to; then tighten it, and if it has dislocated again, set it back in place, and if it is broken, fix it, and cure the wound as much as possible.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the thigh bone is broken, and if it is, then not much damage to the head; and it becomes long, and bends at the knee, and pain comes to the waist, and swelling, and the fractured part becomes inflamed.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is if you extend your hand above it as long as you are above the fracture; and examine what the fracture and its appearance are; and if the fracture is only at the head, then set it as natural as possible.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	If the fracture is long or it declines to the bone, then I direct the patient to lie on their stomach, as long as the restoration of this fracture is not impeded.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have placed it evenly, if you place an emplauster on it, then place a fist or a horn on top of it, and tighten the fracture as much as possible so that it does not move; and apply the leu to the sides of the chest, as long as the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if you are in labor and it comes, if it is not painful, as long as the pain is relieved, and place yourself on your knees as we have said before; then return to the restoration, and tighten it as much as possible if there are no other complications; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	The break of the helper
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The helper is the one that is between the upper and lower part of the shoulder blade, and if it breaks, then it must be restored according to one of the following ways:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And lift the head of the shoulder as much as possible, and let it hang over the shoulder blade; then the dislocation is placed on the helper at the top, until it reaches the shoulder, and there is a hook in the helper, then it can hold any weight or extend the arm; then place the hands together to hold the dislocation, as much as the dislocation returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is if one cuts the patient's hair according to their desire, and holds their hand on their collarbone, then commands the ministers to touch the area where the incision is, and touch the rest of the body lightly, and extend each part to its place.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then tighten the limbs away from the incision, and hold the area where the incision is, and extend each part to its place.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the incision is near the shoulder blade, then it is necessary to make the limbs loose from the elbow, and the other towards the wrist, away from the incision; and if the incision is towards the wrist, then it is necessary to make the limbs loose from the elbow, with little effort, as long as the incision is even with the shoulder blade and the wrist, then make the incision, as you can, and hold it steady until it does not move.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	1. If the arrowhead comes out, if it is not strained for seven days, and it is oiled and greased on both sides, as long as the arrowhead is calmed; then it is extracted, and the manner of extracting it if it is that you place the plaster on the wound, then assemble the arm with the helper, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and stretch the bandage, and extract from the helper and from the arm, if the arm is in its place, nothing will prevent it, or if the bone does not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	2. If you doubt that the bone does not move, if you use splints, and place the wound with a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have between each splint two spaces of about one and a half fingers, and so make each splint as large as it can pass through the wound; then strain the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more firmly but less by moving them apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	1. If you see the position of the pelvis, and the ligaments, as we have said, in the place where you restore the broken member, and you doubt the incision chaut, if you let it remain for three days, as we have said; then look at each third day the link, that pruritus does not inflame nor the norrissemens come to the member because it is too estrois.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	2. If the adress, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	3. And if no such accidents come, if not the only thing that happens is after three days or more, and sleeps the patient on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and put the assistant in a plain linen bandage, and look at each hour of the day or night, that the figure of the broken member does not move, or is not softened by the ligaments; if the adress by the virtue of medicine, and the meat that we have before us, in like manner as the meat is subtle at the beginning; and when it comes to be taken back, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	The patient should have the assistant and leg returned after 40 days, and therefore they must be gently handled and given baths and medicines for the joint to heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	If the restriction is tight and knotted, it should be gently loosened every 4 weeks.
de la brisure du bras	of the arm break
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus" and the "ulna," with one being shorter and the other longer; the shorter one is towards the little finger, and the longer one is towards the little toe. Inadvertently, only the short humerus or ulna may break, or both at once.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the thigh bones are broken, the repairs are light and the cures; and when the larger ones are broken, if it is a poor cure, then more injured than when they were broken individually.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the thigh bone that is broken, then it will be necessary to extend lightly and put in order.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large thigh bone that is broken, then it will be necessary to strain more strongly; and extend at the wrist, and raise the palm of the hand higher than the other, and the leg must be lowered below the other, and let the pain be on its own side, and the wrist raised above, so that it does not suffer any labor; then extend the remaining members of the arm to the opposite part of the shoulder, or to the elbow, and some other members to the other at the back.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he places it evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, he puts each in its place, and if there are no loose teeth that point out of the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then as we have said before, set it and the bone.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the break there is a wound, I have spoken to the individual surgeon; if he takes care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration, aphthones come out, if he is hung from a cord made of rose oil and waxed beeswax, which is neither too hard nor too soft, and it is hung by a subtle thread, as long as the aphthones are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then the osteotomy is performed, and the surgeon places the drill with a large amount of powder from the mill, placing the pins, and making the bridge more complex than others; and it is necessary that there be six pins or braces in more positions: either the bridge is in one of the bones, or in two; and it is drawn more under the bridge than elsewhere, and less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and the edges that are under the bridge, wet and soft, should not be too hard or rough; and the sutures, which are drawn out, should be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the limb after some years.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any accidents come to the member, as itch does to the member, if you heat the member with hot water, as long as the itch is calmed, then let the member rest in its place.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then the extraction resumes, and if the limb is softened and the bones are exposed, and it seems like something, then it is removed.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling does not come to the member because it is too tight, as it can be softened by being pounded in a mortar and pestle, and let for some years, until the swelling comes and then it is pulled.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	If none of these things come to pass in the patient within twenty years.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If the dislocation is not reduced within thirty years, then the patient can move their arms to their sides, and their shoulders will be equal; they will be still and quiet, and sleep on their back; and it is hoped that this dislocation is restored in thirty or thirty-five years, or by chance in twenty years, depending on the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Wishes that on the back of the hand and wrist there are few dislocations, and only twisting many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	1. When the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, if the patient can manage to hold it steady, and then place their hand on the extended thigh; then extend the fingers of the broken bones, and place them evenly in the holes, as far as they are well-jointed; then apply plaster and bandages, if necessary, and then place a splint according to the size of the thigh; and finally, wrap it in a drapery made of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	2. If the fracture is near the heel of the foot, then make a ring of bandages, and instruct the patient to tighten it around their broken foot; then wrap it with a long strip, and hold it tightly, as tightly as the heel of the hand, and hold it firmly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the knee, then it comes to pass that you put a splint on and another one in the sole, if the hand is straight and upright, then the leg is held tightly between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes from neither of us, but is bent, if it holds, then as it should; and the strain with the sole, and if you see that you put a splint straight small for raising the fracture, and does not move; and if the fracture is in others, as in the index or one of the others, if it holds, and the leg is held with the healthy one that follows; or you hold them all together, what you can, or you put on an splint, as you can; and be careful in the restoration and the position of the wound, and whatever comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken rib
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The rib of the patient is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward; the restoration is if it lies on the lines of the fracture and the other side is dislocated.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient cries out in pain, then extends each of his muscles to his equal part; and it is when the fracture is made in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the rib, then some of the muscles are pulled towards the point of pricking, and the others are pulled away from the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And when it reaches the joint, and therefore, let the ligaments of the joint be loose, and the extension be equal; then place the bone in its natural position with both hands, as it should be, and then put the splint, and the bandage, if necessary, and hold it in place so that it does not move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it has swelled, if you let it rest, then return to your home and your care; the dressing is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the ankle with a bandage doubled in size from I to III, and remove any excess, then bend the leg so that the heel reaches the root of the nail, and tie the long end of the bandage between the calf and the leg, loosening the joint of the knee; then bend the leg and the calf with the bandage, then put the brace on, and place one on the bone of the leg; then place the leather between the leg and the calf to fix the dressing, then begin to tie the third or fourth loops on the brace; and as more loops you have on the brace, and less the tightens; then take out the two ends of the string that you have tied between the leg and the calf, and the three loops that are still on, then go back to the ankle where the string is, until you see the joint; the dressing, if it does not move from its place, then leave it as is, then it will neither swell nor become inflamed.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it happens, if it leaves, and addresses what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, if it can be avoided, so be it; and if not, then it must be cut, and the wound treated as we have said, and the cure, no matter how healthy it is.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is the joint broken when one puts it in its place, as we have done with the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration that has been made, it does not cause pain to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	You should know that the joint is restored in L time, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the right knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	However, in the right knee joint, there is little fracture, but it bruises many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is either a sprain or a puncture, and there is pain at all wounds, and it feels quite bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put the bone back in its place as much as possible, then put the splint, and if you have one, put an iron bandage, and tighten it as it should be, then reward all the dispositions we have said for other fractures, such as apoplexy and other similar accidents; if you put on each accident what is necessary to make it healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "true" by right, not "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and all the mending is like that of the arm, and for this the restoration is done as well as that of the arm properly. And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg around in all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bones are broken, then turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the big bones are broken, then feel great pain and see that it is well; then turn around.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	The patient should extend the limb and hold it evenly; however, if the fracture is uneven, and there are more pieces, then the extension should be less severe and lighter; and the bandage according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, if you have two strips of twisted hair that bend the leg on one side and the other, and are long enough to reach from the knee to the ankle, then wrap them around the leg and tie them tightly, and at this point do not let the leg lean to the left or right, and it is well; and no one has increased the pain in the leg, and it is of fust, and he puts it on the leg to warn against movement, and properly made it there in the fracture or wound; and shake each day the leg to see if it has swelling or any other accident; if the cure is as soon as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot are never broken and must be very hard, and only cracked in certain positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If it happens as if the bone is broken, and you see the bones pressing against each other, if they are so painful on the earth, just like when you are flying, then put your hand on the bone that is dislocated, lift the bones as much as they can be raised in their place; then press them until they feel straight in their sockets; then insert the splint and stitch it up, and make a small tube in the abdomen of the dislocated limb, then draw it out at the knee joint, then wrap the wound with bandages, and other things that you have skill for.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the bone has not healed, because you will find the bones uneven, broken, displaced.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any of the two fractures, if they are set, as we have said, you must do with your hand; then put a splint on one end according to the length of the other, and make it slightly larger, then put the peg in the hollow that I mentioned, and tighten it; and if there are two or three, or more, fractures, if you put one on each according to its quantity, wrapped in a single layer of linen, and draw the peg out of the hollow of the other; and make sure the splint is held firmly against the chest of the pelvis, so that it does not slip.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	It is necessary that you do not ignore the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and treat each accident as we have advised.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the bone break of the shoulder
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the woman's shoulder bone is broken, if it is set in place, then it inclines towards the side of the shoulder, and is held by the arm; then fill the nature of the cloth with the woman's cloth, and put it as large as possible; then bend the woman, and gently bend the shoulder, and then take off the cotton, as soon as it comes into contact with the nature, and return the bone with the cloth; and if she sees blood, if the cotton holds the blood, and if she has bled, she should be reset, and in seven days or more: if the fracture is restored, and if you see, take a bucket of cold water, and hang a rope around the neck, and blow all the water into the nature; then let the rope form, as long as the bucket is empty: the nature will return to the fracture; then fill it with cloth, and leave it alone for several days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of the thigh is broken, or of the woman, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the hind leg; and these breaks are not hidden that are near to him who puts his study and his use, and he reads my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break means in more directions the right way of restoration: understand the donkeys.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the neck, when it is broken, take an ostrich's gape and bite the neck; then wrap around drapes, and leave it three turns outside, and it will be healthy very quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of injury with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, as the bone of the shoulder or elbow, or seeming, that he be now healthy, if the wounds that we have said testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the healthy wound is, if the dislocation of vitrioles, if you have nothing else, then resume to reset the fracture at the same hour, or the next day, if the patient does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the patient does not come the next day, leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the patient is calm and does not touch it on the third or fourth day, because you will have caused an unwanted accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken, it should be reduced gently at the point of discovery, and you should place it lightly in your hands, extended slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not easy to place in your hands, if the splint is this one made of iron, which is seven or eight times as long as the limb, and the width according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to pierce three or four times, according to the number of each reduction of the fracture; and it should be strong but not too large, so that it does not cause compression on the member in your hand, and it should also be in front, and large at the end, in this way:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	The first sentence translates to: "And is called 'palisade', because it is necessary that the heads of the bones be placed on the head of the bone; and the bone should be once, as much as it rises, and be even with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	The second sentence translates to: "And if the fracture is not noticeable, and the strains cannot well grasp the bone, then it comes that you hold the head of the bone, as much as the strains have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	The third sentence translates to: "And if you do not bring the bone back, as we have said, if you hold it with an instrument that is suitable for your hand, or sharp and thin, then take this which is found in the hard parts and small scratches of the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, advise that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you hold it long enough and then wrap it in black vinegar cloth, properly wrapped; and do not put anything on the wound or other place that is greasy, so as not to cause putrefaction and corruption; then apply ointments after resetting the bone, and leave the wound exposed, covering the entire wound with the cloth according to the size of the wound, and make sure the wound does not become tight with the break; and many have had this experience, and have made the patient suffer from the break or rot or corrode never; and the scars are more slick and sooty than the other scars.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	When the wound is large or severe, and you doubt that it will heal, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, but it cannot be set with splints; then envelop the limb in a cloth, tighten the splints, make them hard, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after the first or second day that the wound is healing, and if all that you have applied has helped to heal it, and you use a remedy for painful wounds, such as a tetrafarmacone and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary that you unbandage the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is not healed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	It is necessary that the limb be aligned in a way that the belly is covered gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If they persist, and it cannot be held back but moves away from the belly, and has small pieces of bones, then you must tie the wound with a tent, and pull out all these pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	If an abscess comes to the joint, or in any other way of corruption, if you are able to cure it, according to what is written in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	If the bone is broken and exposed through the limb, as if it were the bone of the shoulder or the helper's arm, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if you do not touch it because many times it dies but leaves it until it bleeds; by chance, cure the wound after 20 or 30 years, then treat the wound, if you can. And if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of the hot flashes that come by surprise
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They come often after the heat of the bath, and at the same time when it is near the joint, and it is a shame to see the member in such a state; and by chance it cannot make the member follow its natural course.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	When the patient is well: if they are given laxative medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and senna, and other similar things, and you do not take any of these, or all together, and mix them with warm wine, or with an abundance of beer, or with honey; and they are taken in purgatives, and the bowels are well strained, and not moved by the hands; and then the purgation is resumed, and another one is begun as soon as the nodulations cease; or if a piece of plaster is strained; for the property of this plaster is that it allays the pain in the nodes, and allays all the swellings in the limbs; and when the nodulation is turned into hardness, as if it were a piercing, and it becomes insensitive to the touch, if the cloth is removed, and the superfluity is cut off; or it is applied to any part of the body, as soon as it is healed, and the cure as soon as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	A weak limb that is weak after confinement
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	After the fracture of the bone is healed, and weak after the weak limbs and subtle, if there are causes: either because one was too tightly bound, and not as it should have been; or because it got too many knots, and could not come to the nails at the member; or for a multitude of twisting; or for too great movements, not in its time; or because there is little blood in its heart, and it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient sweat and tighten the heart as much as possible without multiplied in it; then give him a bath, and bring joy and ease; then put poultice on the limb, if the swelling attracts to the great induration, and the twisting often turns green, as the induration approaches the member; and then restore its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A dislocated limb after injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	If the limb is swollen after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the dislocated form of the limb is distorted, it is not in its natural state: if one does not believe the folk who say that one must break the bone entirely, and many others have done this in our land; and these bones are blamed, and great harm comes from them, and by chance the death occurs; however, if the wounds and tortures are fresh, and if they can be raised with hot water, or herbs that soften are cooked, as with blisters of vismalve, and roots, and honey, and similar things; and if I apply a mollifying ointment, as well as it is made, and take the vismalve root, and fry it with lard or sisament oil, and apply it thus; or take fat figs, and fry them with colon fiber, and similar medicines that dry the soaked matter.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is there where the node is not fastened by continuous and long pressure with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be no movement in the limb at every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twist is awakened and made to hurt, as well as the incision, and it is necessary for the bone to be heated, if it comes close to the bone, with a subtle and light cut; and then it should be dressed and studied in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it comes now to bring sense to it.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if we delay, if we read it, and by chance if we reset it on the shoulder; because it does not come easily when it is inflamed: many times it comes with pain and other aches; always, when this happens, I make the patient healthier, then I let it, as long as the abscess is sore, then anoint the limb with warm ointment and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as we cured it when it was in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the treatises for the dislocations of the shoulder joints.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There are cases where the mandibles are dislocated, and the dislocation of both can be in two ways: either they are a small piece of the jawbone, and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging downwards, and cannot hold saliva in the mouth, nor close the mouth, and wrap the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	If the dislocation is small, it can be reset through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	If the dislocation is complete and achieved, it must be reset as quickly as possible without force; in such a way that the surgeon marks the shoulder of the patient with his thumb, and puts a little bit of one of his hands on the root of the dislocated mandible to open the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand is deft, to hold it; and orders the patient to soften and move all of the mandibles.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the measurement is equal, as it is in its place in his arm.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is pulled back, then it is the two mandibles together, if the teeth are hot and oily, as long as they are lightly pulled; do not pull too hard on the tooth, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are pulled back properly, and the patient's mouth feels relaxed, if you put soft cloths made of oil and wax on it, then gently pull on the strings; and the patient lies down on his back, and his head is between the knees, if he does not move to the left or right, and does not strain himself, but chews light meat as long as the pain is steady and does not affect the jaws, and then do what you see being done, and do not try to open the mouth with your teeth and tongue, as long as the jaw is well relieved and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their original position, then if fever and chills come, and by chance the stomach becomes distended, and by chance vomiting is clear.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a disaster; and many times died those who came, in nine years.
de la forcelle	of force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot be removed from the cost of the continuation of the foot and the other, and it is never unstable at the end, and it is felt well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is if the patient is able to lean on his back and extend his arms; then press the shoulder against your palm, and it will return; then place the splint and bandage on it, and tighten; and the part that is towards the elbow cannot be realigned; it is not easy, and if it does not become stable once, then reset it at the shoulder, as we have said; then place the splint and bandage on it, and tighten, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy; and then again bring the head of the dislocation back to its place when it is released from the shoulder.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the shoulder displacement
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways in which the shoulder dislocates: either it dislocates at the part of the shoulder socket; or it dislocates at the part of the upper arm; or it dislocates at the part of the elbow, and that is rare; and it does not dislocate from the shoulder blade, nor does it dislocate from the nerves; and more often it dislocates towards the socket, even for those who have little strength, because at this jump it is very painful; for those who have enough strength, it jumps a few times and returns a few times.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, it happens to some men with a hammer or chisel, and the spine of an abscess is shattered, and ensure that it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must pull it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocations occur when pulled towards the shoulder, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one; you will find a difference manifestly between them; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hole, and then pull the shoulder towards the head of the shoulder, as if it were a socket; and the patient cannot bring his hand to her eye, nor move any movements; and if it is dislocated upwards, if it is not hidden, because you can manifestly see it at the top; and this way of dislocation is not easy to return, when it is new, or if the patient is painful.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The manner is that the helper gently places their hand on the shoulder of the sick person, then removes your hands from the collar, and gently loosens the joint at the top of the neck; the helper gently places their hand on the neck, extends it upwards, and puts it back in its place, if necessary.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in our hands afterward, if it is necessary to bathe the helper in hot water; the helper's hand becomes soft and soothing, like a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in hot water, and it becomes soft; then the helper soaks the helper's back, and puts on a stool under the collar, not too soft or too hard, then puts the foot of the other leg on the stool, and gently lifts the shoulder muscle, and trails the helper's hand; and other helpers trace the helper's shoulder, if it does not move at all; this shoulder now returns, and if you see it in this way: and that you are present with the one who is larger than the helper; and it should be turned towards the chest, and the shoulder should be placed under the collar of the helper, and gently lift the collar up, so that the helper hangs down on the shoulder; and other helpers trail the helper's hand towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, if it can do nothing heavy with it, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the reduction is done in another way: and it is like this: take the long pin of the earth, whose ends are also like this pistal, and not too big or too rough; then it is put into the patient's shoulder, but if it has bent too much on one side, and the shoulder is very long and thin; then it is stretched with the other hand from another part, forming a joint that returns to its place suddenly; and if it does not return after all these things we have said, then this cure must be done: take two large and four small ones of good quality, which have their ends entering forward from below the shoulder according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie the head of the shoulder that was not bent by the mallet, then place it at the end of the mallet; and extend some of the arms over the long shoulder, and the helper over the shoulder of the arm, then put the arm at the elbow of another piece, and stretch out the hands, and let the chest hang from the other side: the joint was now straightened.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is straightened, in whatever way that may be, if you must put the mallet at the end of the shoulder with a thread of linen even, then sprinkle the powdered mill with incense and wolf's fat all over the shoulder and around, then stretch the mallet at the end of the shoulder, and twist the line on the powder, and wrap the hand around the arm at its neck, and let the hands remain still.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	It is necessary that he drinks little, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it heals faster; and then drink more after the fourth or seventh day, and move it; and if it is tight and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	If the joint is swollen due to moisture or another cause, and it is necessary that you administer cauterization at three points, as it is placed in front of or in the chapter of cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you do everything and after seven weeks, the joint does not hold and cannot raise the arm forward, then you should suspect that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is compressed or extended or softened; and suspect that the joint will never return to its place in the shoulder.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first sentence to translate is: "Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing, there is swelling in the member, and later movement comes, if the patient uses the therapeutic bath many times, as long as the swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation it costs
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It is said that the joint that is expensive is repeatedly dislocated, and it returns to its place; and it is dislocated from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not well reponed because it can be seen and felt; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the expensive one with the healthy one, if it can be seen openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is like hair, and cannot be plaited or touched with the arm or the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it always with force, as if it were being pulled out, because if it were pulled out, it would be painful to put it back; and by chance, it cannot be put back at all, even when it is in the socket; rather than other dislocations, which are more painful, and by chance, it comes to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is like this, when it can be returned, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms are expanded, and his hands are stretched according to the course of the limb, from the end to the other, and he pulls the joint back to its palm, as it returns to its shoulder.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is forward, then it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and proud of the root of the palm tree that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to the shoulder, then apply strong extension; and if two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm in each part, then tie a double long and wide cloth; and when the patient's joint touches the joint of the hand, if no oil can lubricate the joint, then form the joints, as it re-emerges; and when it is at the shoulder, put a dry splint with catgut on the wound, and form the arm at the collar of the maid, and leave some fingers, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firmly held in its place, and it does not move, and if you see that the joint is not tightening well, then repeat the application of the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for some time until it is firmly fixed; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If the patient feels pain after the joint is tightened and it does not move, if they bathe and rub gently, and press as much as possible to soothe it; or you apply a fat sheep's wool poultice to the joint, then leave it for one night and the bone, and then enter the bath; and when they wake up, they rub the joint thoroughly, then replace the poultice, and then enter the bath twice or three times until they are healthy; and if you see, if you apply wet vaquin (a type of cloth) to the joint and heat it with a fire, and then bind it; if it returns to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	The first sentence to translate is "li dislocation de la main".
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The second sentence to translate is "Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	When you place the maimed hand on a table, extend the fingers, and make them equal, then put your thumb on the appearance of the joint, and bend it as much as it returns. It is necessary that you look to see if it is well in the hand; then place the maimed hand on the back of your hand on the table for extension and flexion.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then place your maimed hand on the table, and make your other hand touch the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well. If not, then the strain of pressing relieves the pain, and you should leave it alone in order to start over.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in the shoulder after some time, the torn joint will not heal; and do not doubt that as long as the hands are inflamed, nothing can be held or tied: then know that the nerves are injured, or the artery; if there is no other means than fire cauterization to heal the case, and by chance it does not heal with any other means.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hands are in the shoulder, if you put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then tighten it and leave it for some time, then remove it and leave it loose.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot be moved well and there is no pain, if the heat of the spicy wash, and the rub until it is clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never has the shoulder been dislocated in any part, never at the back of the palm or belly; therefore it is set, and the dislocation is pulled towards your hands as it returns, then hold the shoulder with one hand and move it to the part where it was dislocated; and let it rest there, and then put it back in place; and do this often, as soon as it is straightened, and if it is dislocated at the belly of the arm, and do it as I have done before, until it is clean; and do this always, when it is dislocated in another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder joint is dislocated, or if there are more dislocations, if there is no treatment, because the patient dies.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the patient jumps and cannot hold on, and many times the members are softened, or the knees, elbows, or both arms, or the shoulder; and the shoulder is still silent for IV days; that which is silent in the back is called "gilt sitting": the cure is that you reward if the gilt sitting has come from childhood: if there is no cure or sanation for all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	The first sentence to translate is: "Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gallbladder that comes before, there is no health or sickness; and also that which comes directly in the second costal arch, and cannot be cured unless it is properly that which comes to the back, as I say; and that the gallstones are extended over the face in the first ribs equally, and cause pain to it, so that it does not bend; then form the tie at the chest in the earth, and the other as piez, and one line through the malady's nails, and the other as hainches, and as chevilles; and two ministers close the ties, the one at the chest and the other as piez, among the II tisons; and they should be well closed, the tison as we have said, and the mires put their hands on the spine forming, as it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it does not return through this treatment, take a third of the elbow of long bone, carve out the wound, and make the shoulder on the side with the wound, then put the socket of the elbow on the spike; and place the fingers of the other hand on the other end of the elbow socket, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see, do the same for the turpentine that turns the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And is it that you have two knots on the shoulder of one arm, and each has two others, and between each knot there is a thumb of long bone; and each knot has a pertus, or the turpentine turns, and they are firmly closed in the earth if they do not move; and between each two knots there should be one turning, even if the turpentine turns, and there should be in each turning two petits knots of long bone to turn the turpentine; and then the link that is between the ties at the shoulder of the turpentine towards the head, and the other link towards the fingers of the other turpentine, and each of the ministers turns its turpentine on all the links, and the masters put the spike equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When the dislocation is equalized, apply a drying powder with abundant urine, then cleanse, and then apply the third part of a pill of gilbersite and the healthy part of the spinal column, then tie it with a string as we have said, and use subtle restraining herbs until it is healthy; and if nothing comes of the healthing, it comes to administer analgesic and desensitizing medicines with the pill we have mentioned before; and never once give a piece of plaster, and never once come upon the back of the spine being crooked, and make sure that this is not dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, because one does not have to presume to have it: by chance it could come to be death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The shoulder joint and the shoulder blade joint are only dislocations, unlike other joints; and the shoulder joint is divided into four parts: anterior and posterior, and medial and lateral. The more anterior and lateral it is, the less posterior and medial it is.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of this dislocation is that when the bad leg is joint with the good one, it is longer and more open, and the bad knee is wider than the good one, and it cannot double its knee at fire; and it is the one who is lame from aches and pains, because the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who comes to the aid, if it is that this accident is against these fronts.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who comes to the front, if it is that his leg is well according to the accomplishment; however, do not double the genital region with pain, and if you see it happening before, and hold his urine, and enflame the anus, and when he goes, if it passes under the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who comes to the rear, if it is that he cannot expand his genital region, and does not double, and the other leg is more twisted than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the shoulder is pressed against the costals.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to return the joint, it will be lax and deflated, and the limb will be twisted; by chance, if it returns, and there is no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, then it may be necessary to use a strong minister, and stretch the leg with two hands, or with the other leg that is lying beside; and others use their hand to extend the leg in a similar manner that they loosen their hands from their belts, then they tie the leg with a cord around the ankle; and they also tie the head of the leg with a cord; and they extend both at once, as long as the patient is lifted off the ground once, and holds it steady.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common in IV cases, and if the dislocation returns, it is indeed so.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not work, it is necessary to treat the injury. When the tooth dislocates, it is necessary to tie the gum around its healthy side, then tie the ligature at the root of the tooth, and the other end around the angle; then pull the other members towards the angle and force; then apply other measures to the patient's arms, and stretch the large gum of the loose tooth, and extend it over the bony prominence: if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is less painful than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	1. And if you do not hold it in this manner as we have said, then it comes to pass that you must press both feet of the maimed man together with a strong lever on the ankles, and on the knees, and so the maimed leg is extended twice as much as the others; then it is hung from the top of a stake, and its two arms are laid on the ground; then command the minister to embrace the head of the chest, and other ministers hang down with the maimed man, who embraces form the chest, for the joint now returns to its place.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	2. And when the dislocation is at its worst, if the maimed man has a grip, as we have said in the one who has a tight grip, and draws the limb of the maimed person properly, and also the foot; then put the bandages, the head and the other on, then place the bandage between the maimed person's thighs, so that the form is made; and have it planted with wet drapes on the maimed man, so that he does not bleed, then extend each minister towards him, and the maimed man places his hand evenly in his hand, and holds the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it here. Press as we have said in the gibbosity, and help the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, if it's necessary to extend the affected leg as we have said; and put your hand on the pain of the joint on the other side, then press with the other hand, and pull it towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the front, if it's not possible to extend the affected leg as we have said; and do not lift yourself off the ground, but make sure it is as it was when it was dislocated in front, as we have said earlier on the hips; and put your hand on the joint at the table, and press on the joint as we have said before; and when the leg is extended, it will be equal; then adjust the stirrups, and insert the strap, and hold it with a bridle, if the leg does not move; and rest for three or four hours, then remove the strap, and see if they are equal, if the bridle, as we have said before, and leave it alone until the member is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it should not be pulled to the front, but rather from the sides and downwards.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	If you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee and it does not move towards the knee, it is indicative of dislocation; the restoration of the shoulder is if you place the patient right-side up, extend the leg if possible, and place your back on their head, and place their arm between their legs; then grasp the shoulder with your hands, and stretch the two upper parts of the shoulder as far as it re-ascends to its socket, and the signs are that the knee is gently held in place; then apply plaster, and tighten the leg at the knee, and the bones assemble themselves four or five times, then remove the splint; and do not move the patient's limb too much until they are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not present, if extension is applied firmly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it becomes healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the toe
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The toes are never used, and never completely fall apart, but are rather bent and twisted.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and before reaching the part where it is dislocated: the limbs are light, and it should be extended gently with one's hands as soon as it is possible only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, if you manage to sit the patient right, and hold the ankle with your left hand, then draw the knee towards you, and then on the other side twice, and then pull up the foot; and do this twice, as we have said, by ending and pulling up the foot; if it returns, that's good; but if not, if you repeat the dislocation, because it returns; and if it cannot return, then hold the patient's hip against the ground, and close the knee firmly on the ground between the knees, and draw the leg back so that it does not twist the ankle; then mark the ministers with the knee, and extend the limb to the hands or to the other side; then extend all the ministers equally, and the pulley is either behind the ankle to hold the ankle while you are stretching it; then place the dislocation in your hands, and mark the healthy leg on the opposite side, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When it arrives at the point, if they apply plaster and stitch up, and the wound forms, and tie off the leg to the thigh, where the tendons are exposed below the ankle joint, so that the tendons do not stretch too much; then leave it for II to III days, and if the tendons relax, then tighten them again at the end of II or IV days; and if it advances to this point, it is a sign of success if it does not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms, and it comes to the surface, if you can ease it, as we have said, as soon as it is healthy.
des dois	The first sentence to translate is "Ou
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they can be extended well with effort, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no doubt or pain, if you can make the patient lie on his back or side, then place your hand on the affected joint, then press with your finger on the opening of these joints until it re-opens; and when it is equalized, if there is no opening, then place a table at the top of the foot, then form the plant, and leave it for three days, then take it out; and let him rest, until he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, often the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in your treatment, if you are skilled and have used it long enough, and if you are pitiful and merciful and slow, do not be rash; and at the beginning of things, use soothing remedies for abscesses, and let the patient hold the hand of God, if you do not see hope for health; and when you see hope, then set the member to the bone, unless the abscess bursts and comes out; and when the members are at the bone, if there is need to use soothing remedies for abscesses and cure the wound, according to what is necessary for simple diseases; and do not enter into a path of despair, according to what I have said, as this is according to your creator, and for the knowledge of your arm and heart.
Amen	I understand your request, but
