O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, three sons, I have fulfilled this book that is beyond the science of medicine and has assembled its fulfillment in it, and has made the end through its exposings and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I have fulfilled this with this method, which is from the work of hands, and it is to know "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is troubled in our region and is all overturned, if it is perished by the science and craft, and there is nothing more to do than the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And this is how the error and vanity have come about, and the intentions are closed and science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I seem to think that I will revive this ordinance of this cauterization according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the sharp-edged instruments of cauterization, and other tools of the work with the alignment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is their craft.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled hands masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who enters this science to surpass in anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the bones, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of the parts, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and tendons, and the number of joints, and the dementia and movable and resting bones, and the issue of their offspring.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Iocras says that the non and the evil are not together, and with the will is little; and at the same time in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we say that who does not know the things before said, if he is not careless in error and does not take the men; therefore I have often seen these who are involved in this science and if they abandon this science and sense experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I see a madman who cuts off my aposteme from scrophules or the neck of a woman, and cuts the arteries of the neck; because so much blood issues out that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And see I another case where a wound of a man's ear was treated, and the wound was large; if it was removed with a piece of the bladder, and he died within three years.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I have often been called to treat this wound, and I see the position of the patient and the size of the wound, and if it was not cut properly, he died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see I another case where the king of our land, who had a broken leg, was treated with a fracture and plaster; and the patients were ignorantly constrained to keep the fracture in place as long as possible, and not leave any part of the leg exposed, and finally it was terminated; and he commanded that it should not be unwrapped; and later, when the leg was completely encased in plaster and the foot, it came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am called to come to him, and I hurried to come remove the leg; and when I dislocated it if it was in pain and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways of the corruption were already confirmed or member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another wonder that collapses enchantment, and then ignites by the malice of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancre, when it is free of melancholic matter, only then can one touch it with iron if it is not part of the limb that can heal what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	1. And therefore, three-year-old girls, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: it is skill, whether or not there is risk in other arrangements; and I will show each page of this book where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	1. And therefore, take care that you keep your hands clean, so that the folk may not speak ill of you. If you take up arms, use them lightly and firmly, and use the best way you can for the grace of God to help you come to salvation and be strong; and let the loathsome diseases of grief be cured; and keep your arms in order so that you may not be accused of coming from this world to another for glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen's advises in his warnings: "Do not take medicine from unqualified practitioners, lest you be deceived by fraudulent charlatans.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have found this treatise to consist of three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and medicinal cauterization, and it is ordered from the head down to the feet; it covers the forms of strangulation, cauterization instruments, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and pricking, and ventouses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; it covers the forms of strangulation and all that is necessary in the work.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered by the main doctor's hands, and the forms of the surgeries.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	However, if we remember our work, it is necessary that I give the quality of the help and not harm to each complexity.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the help, and not harming, is the longest word and the most subtle science and the secret remedy; and for this they speak more of the wounds, and agree on this; and they are few in their words because I doubt the longevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally with all complexions or matters, but for the complexions: it is to know hot complexions with matter, and dry complexions with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, all cauterization is useless and they say that cauterization is not helpful; the other says the opposite: that cauterization is only useful for diseases that come from chills and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used for hot diseases caused by chills or dryness; but those who say the opposite that cauterization helps great with hot diseases that come from the courage of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you perceive the heart of the patient and its moisture at the complexion of hot fire, you should quickly close the heart.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it at any time by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all paths, no one intermeddles more than he who has experienced it, and knows by long use of the cauterizing chapter, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their symptoms and the extent of tensions; for other complexions, we have no knowledge, even in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And they were found to fit and agree with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, children, that cauterization is a secret of the healing arts, and more benefit than hot medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and only comes to harm when it reaches the member that is cooked, and does not harm any other part.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Hot medicines come from one part to another by aloofing, and bring diseases of grief to the healthy state; and by chance, if the fire has too much for its substance and its goodness, it does not harm at all, if it has no superfluity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	1. And I found this in my research through experiment and the length of service and the study I have dedicated to the art, and it is true for things; and for this I apologize for the length of the language, as I only want to share with you the secret that is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, as it treats the diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	2. Know, son, that the cauteries should be made with the right tools and materials.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	3. I say that cauterization is useful in all cases, because the wounds are not well managed by the help of the cauterization; and moreover, if the cauterization is done for necessary pains and hastates that cannot wait for the time when the greatest malice does not come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	1. And never think, it is a foolish thing, if it follows the example of the fool; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and he says thus, but it is not so if one takes care, because cauterization is only a medicine that dries the complexion, and drys the humors that cause pain, and is worthy of medicine for its haste in its work and its chivalry and its nobility.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	2. And it is possible that the disease returns never according to the complexion of the patient and the wound of the disease and its virtue; and they are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meat and similar things, if not cauterization is administered to him or he has little excess and moisture, like cauterization for pain, and the similar things, and part of the pain does not return often; but this is rare.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand that cauterization is a part of medicine, and this is seen; but they believe that cauterization is only after medicine, but we understand it is false, and cauterization is a part of medicine because when we know the ways of treating any disease and they are not effective, then we apply cauterization, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is well that cauterization is a part of medicine, but do not pay attention to the ignorant.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that gold-tipped cauteries were as harmful as iron ones, and they said this was due to the quality of the gold and its high substance. They said that gold-tipped cauteries do not cause poisoning, but it is true because I have experienced it and found that it is true in some people; and gold-tipped cauteries are as good as iron ones, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And when you hold the instrument of gold, you do not know if it is hot by the color of the gold, and it has cooled down; and if you heat it too much, it melts; then it becomes enough for prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that is why we use fire cauteries in our work, because we have not yet found a better way.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or if you have commanded this chapter of the lous head piercings, because it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	oil cauteries
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is used for moisture and cold on the lous head, and in it we do two things: by the cause of a disease called "soda", and by the cause of many humors that descend to the lous as ears, eyes, and for countless dreams and toothache and throat pain, and even for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and coma, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that if the physician purges it with solvent medicine altering the head III nuis or IIII, according to which virtues and ease and accustomed pain the patient can bear; then cut off the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then set the knife between your hands, and press it; afterward put the root of your palm tree between the root of his thumbs on his two fingers; and if you have two means, if you bleed, then squeeze the cauterization called "olivare," which is of this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And place the knife at the joint, and make a descent and tension with your hand frequently; then gently hold your hand, and see if you can feel the bone slightly; if you cannot, continue the cauterization until you feel the bone as I have told you; afterwards take some tweezers, and put on a piece of soft cotton, and place it on the knife, and let it rest for three days; afterwards put on a moistened bandage; and leave it as long as the wound is healing; afterwards cure the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said to the ancient one that as the wound becomes older, it purges itself; and therefore it helps.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that the fire cautery should be so tight that part of the bone is cut, and then remove what is cut from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that the fire cautery should be so tight that it pushes the bone out, and if it is too large, as women do in their fuses because the humors come out outside; and it should be left for a long time overstretched; after that it should be treated and sutured.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	1. These two methods of cauteries do not seem less effective in general, despite any fear or doubt in anyone; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head of the shoulder is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we have experienced in other parts of our body; and even when the patient's strength is weak by nature, the first appearance of cauterization appears more salving and less painful to me, and therefore I use it accordingly.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	2. of the ancient pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	3. When throughout the head there is chronic pain, and it lasts for a long time, if one must use pills and ointments called "cochies" and purges of the head and oils and plasters; and when the cauterization is done as we have said before, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	The head of the patient is of great nature, and it should not be too cold; therefore, we recommend using fire cautery on that part.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After treating each corne of the eye with fire cautery, as we have mentioned before, and then treat the area called "vascular" which is where the veins are located; and these are the ones that are put under pressure; and hold your hand so you can see the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cautery than in others, and I will explain further; and it is necessary that the cautery points be more sensitive than those used for the cauterization of the chief, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	1. "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	2. "For in one part of the fire cautery, there comes sudden pain, and it spreads to the entire body, and the head is purged with medicines, and other cures have been made as I have said in the division of diseases, and all of this does no good: therefore, I have done cauterizations in two ways, that is, with hot and dry medicine.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	3. "If you have a poultice of alum, and the wound oozes and becomes infected, and then you sew up the head where the pain is, and afterwards make the temple so that you can put the poultice of alum back on; and when it is put back on, if the patient holds the poultice well and leaves it for 12 hours, and then removes it and applies the ointment of cotton, leaving the wound for 2 to 3 days; then you cover the wound with a warm damp cloth until the swelling goes down.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of inflammation, when it is healed; and if you see that there are no curative drugs that I have written or treated other curative drugs.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron burn is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron burner, and it will be in this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cage or has a hole like a beak, and fits snugly; and place it on the painful part, hold your hand and gently touch the iron with the other hand, as much as you can bend without causing pain, and cool your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is relieved, and there is abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting on a piece of linen cloth, and then wrapping the leg with thread three times; then he puts on a piece of finely woven linen, and then treats the leg with ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this embolism with the cauterizing instrument called "cultellare" at all points, and make sure not to compress the artery in this embolism that is not yet anchored.
de emigraine	of embolism
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat an embolism as we have said in divisions of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization does not profit the patient and the medicine and the fire does not help, therefore it is necessary that you sharpen the cauterizing instrument called "cultellare" as much as possible; and then make a line of a half dozen of turns on the leg, and with your hand once, and hold the artery and do not compress the bone; and wear the mandible that is silent when you cut, and the nerves only move the silent and spasmus does not come to the patient, and wear the decorrement of sanc from the artery when it is copped, or coped if there is great pain and immediately to the one who does not know, and who is not studied and experimented; and leave the wound in its place; but I will tell you how to stop the sanc when the artery is coped, and I will show you where it is cut in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	When you see that the cauterization does not help with the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the opposite end of the head as we have said, and treat the wound as soon as it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization or the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cauterization that has been cut; and this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and it is heard of medicines dissolved and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not stop, then shave this cauterization which is called "points", and its form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the earing, pull on all the hair of the ear, or if it causes pain in the temples, and separate a little piece of the root of the ear until you feel the earlobe; and do this 10 times for each ear; after that, cure the ear so that it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	from the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is only those that move due to sweat, as we have said in divisions of the disease; and do not make cauterization like those that come from scratching and spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you tend to this appearance of torture that is silent of smoke from the eyes and excretions of the head and gargle, and it is not worth, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another in the temple, and the third in the jaw; and place the cauterization in the part that opens naturally, and make the cauterization where the head of the ear is, and a hole in the cornea of the ear, and another in the temple as long as possible; and leave the cauterization as long as it takes for half of it to be burned; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The appearance of the dislocation we have shown is similar, but it is more subtle and should be a bit larger; after treating the leg as I have said, as long as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is present and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then I make four cauterizations: two on each of the two corners of the chief vein, and one on the chief vein itself, and one on the lower part called "gullets" as we have said before, and cauterize it on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	The first sentence to translate is "Ou caut
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’ils sont lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy, good; and if not, then make three cauterizations on the head as you descend down the neck, spacing them about a thumb's width apart; and the treatment is the same as for others, and if you see assistance, and the patient is in pain, then make one more cauterization on the other cheek; and if skills are lacking, two more on the other two corners; and the treatment is the same as for others, and if it is healthy, then the cauterizations called "olive" are used as I have already mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be washed with years and what we have already said; after washing the head of the patient, then make a cauterization on the head and on each corner, and on the back and three on the spine; and if you have more skill, and the back is moist and the patient is in pain and the disease is far advanced, and make four cauterizations on the spine; and leave it as long as the most painful part remains, and hold your hand gently; after the treatment, when the patient is healthy, and if it is healthy, then the cauterizations called "olive" are used as we have already mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	The first sentence to translate is "de l'epilempsie". The
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilepsy should only be treated with cauterization, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and suffering from poor medical care.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is children who cannot endure, I make them do gargling and mastication modifying the brain often with good meats; after they have recovered their head in a healthy environment, and I perform cauterization according to what we have said before, on the vein and on each corne; and if the patient is weak and suffering, I perform cauterization as we have said to the one who has paralysis and mollification of the corpse, on the spine of the back and collar, and it is the cauterization olive according to the way we have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is ready, make the fire cautery subtly according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is superfluity or corrupted and wet moisture, making large gross flesh, therefore cauterize with parts as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is the declining superfluity of melancholy, and the body of the sick man is wet, then he must drink something because the brain is dirty, according to what is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the sick man; after make me a linen pulp as well made, as the circle, if you put it on the head; and the sick man if he believes, and keep all parts well; after present the liniment, and it is good to be burned with old hazel; and the face is heated, if it can be done without hurting him; after empty the circle by taking out the head, and let it cool; and do this once a week with another government balm as long as it is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to make multiple pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization dries out the head; then, put it on soft cotton and grease with linen butter.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the hair comes first as signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and do this, making the patient clean and washing the head, and all the parts around it, and rub it with more water several times.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that, he commands to shave his head, and I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on both temples where the hair ends, or in one where the hair ends is in one; and cover all the cauterization all the veins and arteries that are open and are the cauterization long according to the size of the temple; and wash it with cold water, and if you see too much blood coming out, if it is not good for you as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision, the cauterization that you have mentioned; and never is it done to burn or hack the two bones of the lower limb.
dou cors des larmes	The tears of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and flow down the cheeks, or are the arteries that appear to be cold and blue; and one sees that it is an excess of cold, watery humors, therefore I make the cauterization that I mentioned at the beginning of the descent of the tears: I cauterize the head, and I cauterize on both temples, and I cauterize on both bones; and if it is done more often, then the cauterization becomes wise with each small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	A large amount of tears comes from the dens of the hairs
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, therefore drink mild wine; after the incision, and I make a cauterization or one of olive oil; and I make two cauterizations of olive oil that are called "clavilis" on the two sore spots, a little soaked in the artery; and you wear the artery that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cauterization called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the ointment of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, therefore cauterize with this cauterization called "oliva".
de coi ci est li forme:	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au mala
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that I am making the cauterization on the two horns and the hairs; and do not let go of my hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	A long hair that does not point
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time has it happened that the hair of the oil is converted into wood, and they prick the oil, and they make an incision according to two ways: that is to say by fire or by an ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then place the patient in their bed; afterwards, take a piece of paper and draw a figure that is as large as the wound, and also shows the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put cotton on the edge of the oil and musk-scented persilion on the oil, and then wash the cauterization with the form that is made:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cauterization on the figure that you have made a few times, and the edges are arsenic in the place; and the signs of health of the wound are that you see the paper retracts, and the hairs rise at the point of the oil; therefore, gently touch it with your hand, and leave for three days, then put cotton wool on it as long as the burn is healed. After the cure of the ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come out, and the paper is softened, then resume the cauterization on the same place as you have done before; and if the hair is curly, if the cauterization is done when the paper is raised to its natural oil, and it is even, and does not touch the hair with the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The first sentence to translate is: "The fire cautery of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a square shape with the cloth; then take French soap and warm water, one for each .З., and gently rub them together well; and apply it immediately, if it does not refrigerate, then scrape off the shape that you made with the cloth of the mirror, and put on the paper of the hairs; and if the disease stays in one drop only, if necessary, and if it absorbs all; and put a cotton ball moistened in the corner of the eye; and the head of the patient is in your hand and show the medicine to the patient, and press the poc and lou muef every time that the patient feels burning from the medicine, because it feels burning like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have held on for a long time, if the medicine has not helped you.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, if you lift the leg, and see that the paper is also raised as it was raised by contraction of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then continue to apply medicine on the leg or if the medicine has not been applied, as long as your efforts are even, and your fingers are placed at points; then apply cotton wool moistened with oil as much as the corners are red, after caring for the leg with the ointment called "dyafenis" and other, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is your task to properly prepare for your work with great care, so that there is no lack of medicine for the wounds.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs stick to it, then continue with the medicine on the part that has become softened by the paper, in the same way as before; after the cure until it is healthy. And this is the form of the flute:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the size and thickness of the men's members vary, according to your requirements; and do not be deceived by the right way to this study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	The treatment of fistulas by burning
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have described in dividing diseases, and your treatments do not work well, therefore it is necessary that you burn it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your hand; and trace the circumference of his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or change position; then put cotton wool in the ear or on the persillon oil; then heat the cauterization tool that has been cut: and touch the head as if it were a pen point, assemble the cauterization tool so that it is touching the head; if you see, if it is pointed towards one side, and if you see, if it is like a tent; but remember, this is good for your patient.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After squeezing the fistula, the opening closes, and the dough is removed; if it opens, the bowel is drawn out. Then, form the fire cautery, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part where the oil is removed from the grease, so that your hands do not get greasy; then put the cautery in the grease of the oil, and it becomes corrupted.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the fire cautery at the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then resume the fire cautery again and as many times as you can, and let it remain for three days; then put cotton wool on the dressing, and apply the drying ointment as soon as it is healthy, and after 40 days have passed, if it is still healthy, then apply an ague corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow according to what comes in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterization of fistulas that no of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understands the fistula, and then in the furnace put the subtle cream of coi; after that forms the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it to the quantity of a .З. of plonc; and hold your hand or the cream firmly, and do not move the patient at all, that the ploncs melted do not go to their oil; and it is necessary to put the oil on the clean cotton wool in the eye-hole or in the ear: the plonc if it is hard in the fistula, and the health of the patient improves.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have mentioned, it's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer tincture of mercury to the umbilicus, and bring the fistula back to its original position according to what is appropriate for the patient's own belly.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks in the lips are called "tears," and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks according to what we have mentioned in divisions, and the patient does not benefit, then use a small cauterization iron according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And he places them in those cracks as soon as they arrive; after curing the limb with ceroty as soon as it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	2. of the abscess of the gall
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	3. When the abscess of the gall comes in the root of the gall or in the ute, or in the teeth, or in the roots of the teeth, and it becomes inflamed and forms a fistule; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit: therefore, it is necessary that you have a fire cautery according to the size of the fistule; after the bote or peritonis of the fistule, and hold your hand until the gall comes out of the font of the leu, and if it does not come out, once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in the cures, as soon as it is healthy; and if it is cured once or twice, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to open the leu and extract the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	The first sentence to translate is "Ou cautere de
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it does not help, then place the patient's gauze in your mouth; afterwards wash the cauterization that was made on you in this way, as if you were putting a collar around the tooth; and remove the teeth from the cauterization with force, and hold your hand tightly with the pain at the root of the tooth; afterwards gently release your hand and continue the cauterization according to your will; afterwards fill the mouth with salty water, and rinse for an hour and then spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gum becomes soft and restrained, and the moisture is dried out.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from cold, or if it is cold or visible, and the remedies of medicine are ineffective, then it has become necessary to have a cauterization done in two ways: either with a burning iron or with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with a hot iron if it is such that you can burn wool with it, and the end in a piece of iron or steel; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a needle, and moisten it with brimstone, and put it on the painful tooth firmly and hold it until it cools down; and often I do this as long as the virtue of the root of the tooth lives, and if you see that the wool and cotton are burned in brimstone, and put it on the painful tooth, and put on the iron charred as much as the fire reaches to the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	1. When the fire cautery is applied, if it is as hot as a piece of iron or copper, and is large enough to reach the mouth of the patient; then heat the cautery, after which form it according to this, and place it on the tooth, and hold your hand until the cautery is cool; do this often, as the pain will be less for you or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	2. It is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with a piece of cloth in the pressing of this cautery, and then releases it; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	I make a cut of the part you want, according to what you have to do; and this is the form of the blade:
des scrophules	of scrophules
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are wet and cold, and do not obey digestion with medicines, then clean the blade of the cautery after it comes out, and let the openings be for the smoke to escape from the other part; and place the blade on the abscess once, or as it is, until it comes out of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then use the blade according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and cover the wound with wet cloth as long as the wound ointments and poultices are needed.
Li forme de la cainne:	1. The form of the chain:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture is present in the urethra and at the same time when cold complexion comes, it is necessary that the patient be treated first with soluble medicines; after that, I perform a fire cauterization at the base of the throat, and you should not come too close to the throat, and do not burn more than a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, I perform another cauterization at the junction of the dole col and the head of the spine, and it is called "clavicle"; and cure the limb as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
de la toust	Of the entire body
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the symptoms of the plague are cold and moist, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an advanced stage of the disease, then make cauterizations on the parts indicated by the force; and the other cauterization is made between the second and third molars; and this is called "clavicle" according to the form mentioned earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cauterization by pricking at the entire cauterization called "points" according to the form of the disease in the ears; and let the points be as many as 30, or as few.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the wound according to what has been said, and let the cauterization be done at three rainfalls according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because they are lighter, because you do it three times in one go.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After you have tightened the belt around your back and chest; after loosening the knot that has constricted the tension as it was with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated, then cauterize the area where the two ners are touched, this is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And cauterize the skin as much as it pierces the costal cartilage, and it would come from the future dressing of four cauterizations; and this is done with the cauterization iron that has three needles, because the figure of cauterization is six cauterizations; and these needles are according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cauterization iron that has three needles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And no time has it been fastened on this nerve because it does not have eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After fastening the cauterization with a thread, put on clothing; after allowing the patient to rest, do not let the limbs be long or tense until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated again, something comes out quickly, therefore, make the cauterization on the large bone of the cauterization clamp, or touch the cauterization with your finger.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healthy.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and moisture come to the stomach, and they are pulled out of their complexion, and many cathartics are given to them, and customary cures are made, and they do not benefit at all, it is necessary that the patient be sedated on his back, and spread his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	1. For this, I made three burns on the inner thigh for the quantity of a dose, at all the cauterization points, and two burns to harden the two costals so that the cauterizations are at three angles, and there should be space between them as they grow sweat until they are joined together when they grow sweat; and they should be the cauterizations if they fester like this, and the figure of the cauterizations should be according to this form in the same way.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see a large cauterization on the stomach according to this form; and the one who has pain from this cauterization, cauterizes by touching and pinching at the stomach at the point according to what you see; then the cauterization is made all over the cauterization that is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure we had before, as soon as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver causes pain and moisture and large viscosity, as soon as it is removed from its natural complexion due to superfluities; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, and if it does not profit him, then the patient should be sewn up on his hateful part; and sign of encephalitis according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, defend the epigastrium, whether the guts of the belly come out; and let there be space between each cauterization of a grower of one doe; and let the cauters be long enough in the curvature of the body, and do not press too hard with your hand on the cauters; and let it only be the half of the moisture, and let the patient lie on his back; and if it cannot, then if it is green, extend his legs, and lean his shoulders; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you wish, if you cauterize these dull cautery points, if you are subtle and gentle in the art, and you wear that you do not burn all of it, because you would dry out the entire body; and that it does not turn to dust, because the hair is very delicate in every place, and you see it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has gone into the liver, and you see if it is in the liver or in the wound: if it is in the liver, it feels great pain but not too much; and if it is in the wound, it feels sudden pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	When this remedy has been applied to the wounds, if the patient is not able to hold his head steady on his neck; then stretch the neck or the part that is swollen, and then heat the cauterization iron which is similar to a rasp, according to what is shown in the figure.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize as much as the flesh is burned, and it becomes hard, until the poultice is all dry; after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds as long as they are healthy; and it is only necessary to use this cauterization iron with no other tools than those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by these hands these diseases have never been cured once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Sure, here is the translation of the first sentence:
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the water cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must make cauteries with Aristolochia roots in this way: take a long, dry, and thick Aristolochia root, as large and long as your two thumbs; put it in oil, and heat it until it smokes, then cauterize I cautere between the forcele and lou col, and II petis cauteres un poc en dessending en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; and do not press too hard with your hand, but open it as you smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they say no ancient that any man uses a fire cautery instead of the razor, and they thrust it between the ribs, as soon as it comes to the abscess; and then there is great pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case there is pain or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be saved.
de la mice	of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have described, and it does not benefit, therefore there are three ways of cutting that you know.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	1. If you are doing three cauterizations or four, align them according to the length of the hairs, following the shape of the fire cautery we described earlier; do not press too hard with your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient's skin rest on his back; another way of cauterization is to burn the one with two needles if you are dislocating the shoulder as we showed in the previous dislocation of the shoulder; ease the knee where the hairs are long, or the pain from the cauterization comes from the side, and make the elevations according to the knee, according to the length of the arm, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the arm.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After the two thighs are inflamed as much as the knees can be perceived from the other side, and then proceed with the cauterization, and afterwards insert it into the cauterization at four points. If you see, cauterize all three points of the cauterization.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when the patient has got rheumatism due to long tenacity, and this is enough that the other cures before say it.
de ydropisie	of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for dropsy, for it is done in the way called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the ways we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four caustics at the bowels, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the kidneys, and two on the back near the spine, and one in the bladder; and let the cauterization be well close to the spinal column.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the patient allows the fire cautery to be performed without interruption, and does not resist the treatment after the cautery, recovery will occur quickly, and the two suggestions with God's help will be combined.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the fire cautery is made on the belly either with the clavicle that we have before us to show it; and on the back, it is an olive, according to which it is placed in front.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the unveiling of the limbs
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the limbs are uncovered to the wet one, and they are plain like citron, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of it between the auricular and the anus; and gently place your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much in front, otherwise the awl will break, and follow this form for the cauterization:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the nail; and let the cauterizations be long enough to curve, one in front of the genital area and the other behind, along the leg; and leave the cauterizations to cure for a long time before removing them; after the cure of the other cures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the belly comes from cold and moisture, as the digestive and absorptive virtues in the stomach and intestines are swollen and inflamed, and cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with weak constitution, if you make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or on the small intestine, around the cauterization; and then make four small cauterizations subtle at all the clavicle subtle, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then perform the cautery on the point, and the cautery on each side, and the cauterization on the stomach of the great wound, because the cure is beneficial when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of epistaxis (nosebleeds)
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the epistaxis is either fundamental, or one or more, and are old and large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and if not profitable, if you make cauterizations: III on the spine of the back, which is entirely deflated and flattened in triangulation, and the cauterization on the bowel II doses; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat is not cooked, and you see the face swelling, then the face on the greatest cauterization on the stomach, as it is said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the gallbladder at all the cauterizations closed; and leave the cauterization over long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After curing the wound as much as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charnosite which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply thecautery, if it seems to be the rasor, and then place it completely on the affected area of the althelul; and leave as much of your hand as the cauteries will reach at the birth of the vein, without cutting; do this once or twice, and if it does not help, cauterize another one as we have said; after the cure of wounds as much as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the alchatim, it will give more help.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound improperly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will tell you in his case, if a serious illness comes that cannot be healed by cauterization alone.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no fistula, and it is awake and gushing sour milk and rotten moisture, if you provide enough of a tent, and keep hold of the whole tent as much as it has to.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After scraping the cauterization that appears to be a rasping tool, and pulling it out of the fistula according to the quantity that enters, and resumes the cauterization as much as the corners are pricked and corrupted; and you should wear leather gloves on the hands that are wet, and large wounds.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	1. If the fistula wishes to go into the course of the vein and the intestine, if you were to do this, and only make it as in the gallbladder, and think that it is not a human one; then cure the gallbladder as much as it is healthy, and if the fistula is removed, and the materials are long bones, then know that the gallbladder is completely healthy; and if the materials are not long bones, know that the gallbladder is in its place, and the bones are corrupted at the root; and then, as one of these that we will say in his gallbladder.
de la maladie des reins	2. of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the head comes on suddenly, and with large ventritis, and no woman is at hand, then it is necessary that you first cauterize the wounds on both sides of the head using the cautery we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in a line, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will provide more aid.
de la vessie	of the uterus
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the uterus is large and weak in head and neck, if the patient retains urine, then first cauterize the part around the vagina on the uterus, where the hair grows, both on the right and left sides, and make each cauterization as long as one of our fingers; and then cauterize the back of the vagina, or II if you want to do so; and so make the cauterizations according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	Of the married woman
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wife is cold and moist, and does not allow any for conception, and the flow is corrupted and delayed; and when they come, if they feel great pain: therefore it is necessary to make three cauteries along the belly, as we have said or about the cauterization of the vesicle, and then cauterize the back; and if the cauterization is by nail, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the shoulder
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the shoulder socket, and for this reason if it does not move from its place, and the sign is that the shoulder is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the leu departments are very wide, if it comes that you cauterize the patient on the shoulder socket at the cautery like a circle, and sew before the leu on the shoulder so that the shoulder turns the circle; and if it is the cauterization like those we have done on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, make three large olive-wood cauterizations, and they should be as sharp as the thorns; and the cure will be made when it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	for the pain of the hernia
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hernia bag, and it is cold and moist, and the patient is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary to purge the patient of large humors from bitter pills or other bone-like pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the way to cauterize is according to two ways: it is known to assemble burning medicines, and to cauterize with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	1. If the fire cautery is done according to methods, then some are like this: you cauterize on the hair root of the beard III cauterize triangularly according to this form, and make good depth and large size, and leave between each cauterization a space of an inch, and it is olive oil; never cauterize on the same spot of the beard more than four times according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	2. And if you see, if the cauterization is done at the circle we mentioned in the dislocation of the beard; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire beard, and all its corners are even.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach the thigh or knee.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And when the pain comes to the thigh and knee, if the patient feels it in the hip and thigh or knee, then cauterize there as the malaide says that the pain is held, and cut out four pieces of flesh, on the side part least; and whether it is the cauterizing cautery or the sharp edge of the knife, if the malaide feels that the pain spreads to two points or close to it, then cauterize at that point which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	When the pain is not relieved, make it a cauterization; and if the pain is towards the thigh, then cauterize with the cutaneous or circular cauterization, and take good care of all your cauterizations that you do not burn too much the cauterization but the nerves and the large arteries, and do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I have also seen cases where they cauterized on the ankle, and they burned so much that the entire leg became inflamed, and the foot as well, and it was noticed and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the stomach, where he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make a fire cautery on both, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the patient says in the fire cautery of the thigh, according to this method, make such a metal and it should be at the head as big as some anvil dough, or a smaller one, and it should be intertwined and it should be of the same size as the piece of an iron nail; and the intertwining parts should be over two parts, and they should also be like noses, and it should have a good handle; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And let it be shaved as long as it is red and greasy, then place it on the handle of the male shaving brush, and make it curve once around the cauterization; and then apply a plaster, and leave the wound open for three days; and then apply ointment after the cure is complete, as it becomes healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	1. Albucasim says that we use little of this cauterant due to its fear, and if we use it little, then all this is cauterizing ointment that can be endured, and either he will wipe it off.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The first sentence to translate is: "The medicinal cauterization if you have an instrument to cross the cheek at the edge of the door, and it is either of iron or of steel a certain distance, and in the upper part it has two of us, and between each of them the quantity of growth of a toe; and they overgrow and pierce, and they join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After putting the iron of the broom on the patient's shoulder, gripping your hand tightly around the broom handle; after applying heat between the two circles of the heated awl that is heated in the fire, and leaves it for an hour, suffering from the patient's chill and artery pain.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For true mordication is like fire; when the mordication has passed, ease your hand with the instrument and raise the awl gently, leaving it for three hours, and then put on bandages as much as necessary to cover the wound, and leave them on until the dressing becomes saturated; and this will be helpful after the care of wounds as soon as they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, make an instrument that traces according to what you have done in the hair; and this is the way of the hot tool, and I have written or described the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Add alkaline and live charcoal, as much of one as of the other, and mix them together, and put them in the new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or if there is a small hole that the point of a razor can go through and cut; and then put some of this powder into another pot well filled, and add alkaline and charcoal and soft ash until you have two parts of the powder you will have well mixed in your hand; and leave it until it comes down with water or clay, then take all of this powder, and mix it with charcoal and alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	When it is boiling and the patient is in a state of mind and under the influence of medicines and cauterizations of other parts, she makes autumn work like fire, and if other medicines are used that are well cauterized on the thigh, such as honey and anacardium and chalz with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galiens also tells us of a cure where some were cured of the pain in the thigh and sciatica, and he says that no other cure is needed, and that it was cured once for every time this cure was made, and he was bathed as he instructed afterward.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And then, in a certain way, you should shave the affected area with fresh and dry hair, and grease it with a little grease, and put it on the shoulder, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and tie it; and leave it for three hours, according to the amount that the patient no longer feels the discomfort.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then, I put it in a bath as long as the chest is raised, and I let it enter the fire, and the pain will all leave and be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	I advise that no one should use such a burning medicine, unless it is after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with the horn of a goat, if it helps pain; and it must be made in a certain way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take the fat and melt it with oil, and put it in the socket which is between the little finger and the other which is called the ham.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After drying the goat horn, and burning it until it is charred, and then putting it on the wool, and leaving it as long as it is red; and do it again and continue doing it as much as you think it will reach the hip bone, and that the pain is subsided; and this way of cauterization is called "cauterization with goat horn".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by touching or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from the appearance of expanded cold matter, none of these appearances is worth cauterization, rather it is for the one that comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the patient has been made clean by removing pus or other appearances, to cut on the back of the shoulder where the pain remains, three lines are marked with a scalpel, and in each line V cauterization or more according to the skill and quantity that the patient can bear; and it should be done according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see, make III cauterizations or IIII on the scalpel handle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This malady often affects many children, and the signs of its onset are seen when they tighten their legs as they grow, and fear; and you see the spines on their backs and the appearance that comes from the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and it is cured, if it is cauterized at the cauterization point according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the cauterization turns purple on every part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if cauterization is done along the spine at the cauterization point pricking II or III lines, and these points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the wound as much as it is healthy according to what we have said, and make sure that you do not perform a fire cautery on the bone that is in the spine of the nose.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints comes from moisture that is expanded to each member of the body, and when pain comes with swelling, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is cold cause and medicines do not cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way: make the gout on the outside of the joint, and it should be olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if you intend to prick at the face of a child, then cauterize all of it as claimed in the "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pain comes to the groin and other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize each groin three times or four times on the whole olive-wood cauterization tool; and if you have skill for more, but do not hold your hand as long as the pain allows.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pain descends to the groin and the back, apply the cauterization we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	If the pain remains in the hand, make points on the second line of the frost; and if there is no more pain, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes from the wrists or shoulders, cauterize each part, and govern the patient's behavior with medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make the patient behave and purge the fever, they will be cured by God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the uterus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	If the rupture comes in waves, and the children descend quickly and suddenly, so that when you see it being cured, it does not return to its place; and if he uses things that soften the belly, so that the child descends from his belly; then make him lie on his back between your hands, and command that he lick his anus as much as he can, and tie it with strings to your two fingers, and sew it around the bone of the lower part of the abdomen, and make a sign that it is like half of a circle around the two curves of the belly; then wash the cauterization with the following form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and it glistens.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then bend the thighs at the knee; and the surgeon should mark his hand to ensure they do not return; and well exercise the thighs on the patient, and put a bandage on each thigh, and the other on the knee that he has marked on the thighs; then place the cautery at the sign of all the hand, and hold it right and as far as you can reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, continue again until you touch the bone; and be gentle so that the blood does not flow when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the surgeon does not die, or another.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you should know that when you do not reach the bone in the cauterization, your efforts are in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be done subtly according to the size of the bone, and the same for grown people; after three days, cure the wound of the needle as much as the burn is healed; after the cure of other ointments as long as they are healthy, and grease his nails forty days on his back as long as the wound is well sore; and it is necessary that his hair be left long and untrimmed, so that the dung does not stick when he goes to the chamber.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to rise, he will find a well-made cut on his arm, and every four days thereafter; and he should rest, so that he works quickly and does not have too much overflow of drinking and eating, and does not have too high fever; and when he teaches this lesson, it is completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say this after the cauterization in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the stomach
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other stomachs and are known, and you see that they do not increase, he should be cauterized according to the quantity, and it should be done in the third form; after the treatment according to what we have said; and no of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at the cautery with three angles according to this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But the first sign of the shoulder is to make a line for the widest part of the fracture, and another one, and hold your hand on all the cauterization clamps.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	However, the first cauterizations are more gentle and less painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	and no pain in any part of the body.
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes from any part of the body, whether it is from chilling or wounding, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure with medicine does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize at the cauterization point called "points", and to make the cauterization according to the length of the affected member, the thinness and strength of the flesh, the location of the torsions and the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cauterization is healthy, it's well; but if not, restart another cauterization on the same part, because it is customary that one must die in the member that is proximate, since it is necessary to do the cauterizations as long as the malady remains.
de meselerie	of medicine
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The remedies are never helped by cauterization once, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can you see the cauterization, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and cure it according to what we have said in the division, and do not hesitate if the corruption does not corrupt all the malady, therefore I make the cauterization on the head: I cut off the head, and the other towards the front at the end of the thighs; and they touch the horns, and the heels touch the hock; and it lasts as much as your hand that the cauterization sticks to the bone, and as much as the effusions come out so that the vapors of the large humors can come out; and I cauterize on the anus according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	1. If the scar is scattered everywhere; it is clearly evident if you cauterize the wound with these cauterizing methods that we have mentioned or chief, and the cauterization is in one place, and the cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and on the spine of the back, and on the knee and the other elbow, and the shoulders, and the wrists, and the tendons of the ankles, and all the joints of the hands and feet, and the sockets of the hands; and you will find nerves that are located below the skin, which you must not burn, and never cauterize on the bone of the fingertips, or the other bone of the stomach, or the other bone of the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	When more you burn, the more help it gives, and benefits the patient; and advise that the patient does not feel pain at the burn if the physician does not, because the heart is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the burn be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the wound with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound is healed and treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healthy, then the burn is made on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the burn be entered into the end of the small joint; then the treatment of ointments as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	For no time is it done that the cautery is made on the hand, arm, and back, at the end of the bone that holds the member, and otherwise if it is forced; and none enters if they are not known of the members and the movements of the bones in the body.
de albaras	of bars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the art of medicine does not help, then the cautery is made with a cautery piece, according to the quantity of the ointment, until the blenching is forced and the color becomes pale; then the care of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and saffron and almond oil, for each part; and all are assembled, and tied with a piece of cloth, and applied to the body as much as it is needed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the gumma appears at the beginning, and you see it stop, if you cauterize it with a fire cautery that seems to form a circle, all around the circumference of the gumma.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the old doctors said that cauterization is also done in the environment of the gumma; and I think it is not very good, because I doubt that it will not become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have always wanted to see this happen once; and the most correct thing is that it is cauterized around, with a fire cautery called "circular," as we have said in our mouths about cauterization.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	The first sentence to translate is "de l'enfleure qui ne puet meurer". The translation of this line is "from
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	If someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays in dying either due to excessive treatment or because the patient is too old (too many years) and lacks blood, or for other reasons, and you see it hurting: then, the cauterization is performed by making small cuts with the cautery; afterwards, it is left alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will die in dying.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it hastening to die, if the cautery is too hot, then its form is like this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	When you have a disease called "adubelati", keep your hand in the environment of that disease as long as the cauterization has perceived the heat, and such cauterization that the patient feels it in a way that the course of the sweat is altered slightly.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment when it is completely cured.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a mangle of the limb, because it mangles the limbs as well as the dry sticks.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the leg that can suffer cauterization together with fire, then sharpen the cauterizations clavile as small and large as it can go according to the leg or the disease; after cauterizing all parts as much as you can, remove all of it, that nothing remains of it, which is corrupted, that everything that is corrupted is not osteit.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then let it remain for three days, and put on the burned parts with oil, suffering burns with fat as long as the burned parts are not healed and the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of burns generated by fire.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days no healthy burns are born, it is good; and if not, continue the cauterization on the parts that need it the most.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this disease has never been cured by medical treatment in the place of fire cauterization; but all cauterization with fire is greater help, and I have already said that the cure of the ague by medical treatment is in the division: take what you have in your possession.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the porers who come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it has happened that the feet were infected with a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that must be treated to ease the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatment of this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know that the treatment of this disease is either by fire cauterization or hot water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is when you heat the foot with fire and use hot water as a cauterizing agent, which is like a needle of copper made as large as it can hold the nail of all parts, and has sharp margins; after that, you put everything around the nail and turn your hand totally around the nail as much as it comes to the end of the nail; then it leaves for three days until it begins to run milk; then I make a poultice of well-cooked herbs with milk, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will be pulled out of their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat the wound with ointment as soon as it is clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if the wound becomes infected many times, and in the hands and fingers, then it is necessary that you have a fire cautery; and it is done in this way: take a piece of iron or steel, or a feather, and insert it into the nail and the horn, as to make warts disappear; then put the iron on so that it burns everything around, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn until the margin of the iron reaches the root of the nail, and it will find the hot water nicely fitted at the root; then suffer the pain of the hot water for a while; then leave it alone, and it will all fall off at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	You then make another cut, as long as you are careful with all these that are in the course, and treat the wounds that have been pierced by the arrow.
li cure dou trembler	and do not tremble.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If any tremble from cold or fever, or other cause, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries or four on the spine, one cauterization between each spine; and one at the stomach with olive oil cautery; if this stops the trembling, and helps to recover from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pustules that have been opened.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	There is no occasion for the appearance of abscesses or pustules, which come from large corrupt materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary to cauterize at the first appearance of the pustule, a subtle cauterization with mirth wood, or if the point is held in the fire, or with the root of Aristolochia long, or with the lenticular cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never is cauterization done at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they do not grow new branches in front, but are disturbed by the superfluity that comes, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great hemorrhages of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the perineum, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the fire cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very sad thing to have to open.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And if there is none, then when you have to put your finger index on the vein wound, and hold it as tightly as possible until it becomes calm and your finger is no longer painful; then heat the olive oil cauteries more often smaller and larger until they are all red; then I, or according to the size of the wound and the strength of the limb and the artery that is cut, put the cautery on this wound or where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery as tightly as possible until it becomes painless.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If the fire cautery has stopped burning when you loosen your child's vein, and it is cold, then quickly take another one that is hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to do this until it is stretched; and watch that you do not burn the nerve that is sensitive, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and be careful when the artery is not extended, that it does not become worse immediately when the artery becomes large, if it is not by one of the four methods we have mentioned: either by cauterization or extraction, or by tightening with thread, or by medicines applied which can cause inflammation; and be careful and extract.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever will tightly tie the knots of threads or to hang things on, or other similar things, should not profit from it if it is not possible.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if there is none, and there is no medicine present, then he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly press until it is painful in the wound and the vein; and he should not move, but his finger should be often cold, so that it does not freeze and becomes numb and painful; and make sure to use those that are skilled in cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	For the first chapter of medicine, we have told you about all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicine, and their causes, effects, and forms of cauterization; and I have taken the lead in this chapter, and I will go to this chapter by my own way because it is lighter to come here.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	However, before I begin this, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first cauterizations, and for this reason there is greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	I advise you not to attempt foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For there are many ways of people coming for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have been so severely affected by their illness that they die easily due to the treatment they receive for their disease, and because of this we must fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who understand your sense and say: "Wait, I am almost dead"; and the disease is hopeless.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is only necessary that you allow those who come to you to have this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not fear too much but rather wisely of what you are certain, and what you could have taken or lost; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your patients for the conversion of health; and this will help to achieve this good reputation, glory, and memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three-fingered, our Lords give you understanding and straightness, and if you will strive for the holy inspiration of its hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have commanded this chapter to you in indicating by chapters, according as it is before or after cauteries, which I have indicated for the chief joints, because you will find it more easily what you will have to do.
dou chief plein d’aigue	A full-grown chief with inflammation
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Sicknesses that this disease comes from time to time in children's wombs, and when it is drawn too strongly from the child's head; and never has it come from a cured cause that it is not.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	The patient will always suffer from this disease only in children, and in all those I have seen, death follows; therefore, it seems to me that I should briefly mention the treatment in some cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I have seen a child with acute sore throat, and the mother engrossed it every day until she could no longer bear it; she thought this moisture was the cause of death, and this moisture is found between the knee and the thigh, between the bone and the knee; if the ovary is like this, and the moisture is between the bone and the knee, and the abscesses are small, then you should give the child a large pus pouch; and so long as the moisture continues, the form of the spatulum will be like this.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more intense, and the abscess is larger, then I will make incisions in this manner:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture has reached the bone, and you see the edges of the chest overstretched in each part, and the wound gushes out when you press with your hand on the dedens, and this has not been noticed before: then it may be necessary to cut the chest III times according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After removing the dressings and powders, and applying wine and oil, and leaving it for five days; then remove the bandage, and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and leave the chest evenly bandaged, and then apply dry, moisture-free meat to the scar as much as possible until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to look at or open the aperture of the abscess, and the assembled angle; for it is never in front; never on the back; never in the side; and never in the front.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, measure the size of the abscess opening and the angle of the wedge, and they are made according to what you can afford; and do not cut the artery; and come forward with blood, if the patient dies from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of remedy
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the ears or throat, and the disease is ancient, and the cure by medicine does not help much, therefore it is cured with cauterization if one cuts off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	1. It is therefore necessary, can you see the eyes, that the patient makes a cut on his head; afterwards, rub the leg with a rough cloth as much as the arteries are visible, then tighten the cloth around the neck all around; then look if the wound bleeds, and the blood from both sides is after the ears, and few are replenished; then sign the legs are swelling, then cover one and the other with a damp sponge of II parts, as much as the size comes to the bone, and that is by the wide head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	2. And if you see, soak the sponge in water and cover the artery with it, cutting as much as II does to the bone, and that is by the wide head.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut, if the blood continues to flow unceasingly.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon feeling, then measure the amount of blood that escapes for three minutes, and then apply a bandage and press hard against the bone; and if it is necessary to pour out six cups of blood, and perhaps more or less depending on what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery, then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone without causing pain, and the cut that was made does not bleed, then tighten the wound and leave it until it is healed.
de emigrainne	From migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the head migrates, and becomes puffy, with moisture from tears and saliva in the temples, and sometimes other strange things, it is treated with medicines of various kinds, but nothing helps, if we burn the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them if the patient has hair on his temples, and understands the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is quickly repaired in most men who are too impatient; and when it is repaired, if he tightens his collar with his hands, then rub the inside of his neck with a rough cloth, and rinse the inside of his neck with hot water until the artery opens clearly; then take the spatula of that form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly burn the soft leather until you feel the artery, then tear it up high as possible, and cut off as many strips as there are in each part; and if the artery is subtle, and the tip turns towards the nail, then the piece of that part follows according to the number of the II chiés.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then it will not be broken at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And cut out as much blood as sixth parts of a gallon, and if the artery is large, then it will be tied with two strong silk threads of the same size as the wound, so that nothing comes before the solid of the wound, and comes off with the sanguine; then cut off the superfluity that is between the sixth parts of the limbs in that hour, and then, if you see, if the cauterization is done with hot fire as much as the bone until the chiés are burned; and this is the most difficult work, if the patient has no fever and is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is help to finally end the moisture: for it is of greater aid to the moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries is required when they are filled with much soft cloth and placed in well-made tents; and if you loosen them, whether you treat them with dry medicines that make them turn red and swell, or with tents as long as it is safe; and if there is no cut to the artery as you wish, then use the lee of vitrol and hold it in your hand that it may not be stained; and if you do not have this present, then put some of the lee of your own body as much as it may freeze, and wet it with cold water so that it may never freeze again, and draw it as it is necessary; and what is most difficult and lightest in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenching from the second part, but the trenching should be well spaced to last longer with less pain.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the wound is too deep, it holds less blood.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between two and three pieces of spice, and then when you have filled the two holes with spice, put your fire on as hot as it can reach the bone, and cover the wound with the two pieces; and they should be separated by the two points because it is not always the case that this cauterization works in everything; and this is the form of cauterization:
des larmes	of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes descend down the veins that are located in the forehead, and it does not profit much from medicine, and you see the face of the patient writhing, and you hear the front ambulation as if it were a cataclysm; and they are thin and moist so that the paper of the eyes look cut, and the papers are shredded by the heat of the tears, if it has to do with this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	1. And they called the old "bruised cure," and that is when you treat the patient who has this disease with his hair or front, then make three incisions on the front according to the length of the front; and one of the incisions is like the other two at the back, advancing the knife without touching the neck, and the others are the costals through the papers, and keep away from the incision of the arteries that are the costals through the papers; and separate your hand from the continuation of the mandibles, and each wound is the quantity of three to the traverse joints; and you have appeared a piece of sponge and moisten the cloth with his sweat coming out of the pain, then cut the spatule of the two parts that is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	1. "From the incision that is made in the temple until the second incision; and scarps all the flesh that is between the two fences up to the entire bone that is seen on the bone, then makes another cut at the other side of the first second incision, and then extracts this splinter.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	2. "If blood is drawn in the first fence with the instrument called 'cultivator', and it is very sharp on one side but very blunt on the other side, do not make it too sharp, and this is the shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	3. "And make the costal cut towards the arm and the costal bone, and the costal blade towards the bone, and the blood as much as it reaches to the second incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And cut all the veins that hang down as much as the incision is continued until it opens a little, and then another part of the bone is cut until it is divided; and then draw out the blood evenly, and express the leeway for the blood taken; then put in each fence a small piece of soft cotton, and put over it fluffed linen cloths soaked in wine and oil, and ointment, and keep them from coming; and when the limb is loose, and apply large amounts of tincture of wormwood with rose oil, and other ointments that are used to heal wounds, as long as it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	It seems like there might be a missing word or a typo in the sentence you
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is no familiar cautery, and you see the hairs thinning and breaking, and the papers burning; and the hair falling out, and the skin becoming inflamed, and the wound bleeding; therefore, be careful with these accidents, as those materials and this cautery only come from many veins, and the cure that is in it, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you command the patient to pull their head back, then make a deep cut across the top of the head, and another larger one below.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, and make it cut through the bone; and pull your hand away from the temples that move in the cheek; and when the bone is exposed, take all the blood that comes out and place it on a sponge, then put cotton between the two lips of the incision, and wrap it with linen; then cover the wound with dampened cloth and oil, and keep your fingers from getting cold; when it is healed, if it comes to the point where it starts to scab over, then the care of things that are exfoliating, which cause the skin to peel, will be necessary.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In the same manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of flax, and make a paste; and apply this to these wounds for healing.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear infection
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that affects the ears is one of the four things: grains, fleas, mines or similar things like that; or seeds, like chickpeas, peas, and beans; or things that flow like sore throat, cough, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it affects the ear with a hole or another way of thing that does not fit well in the ear, and does not grow in the ear, if you put the ear to the sun, it will dry and stop growing.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the piercing, if no drop of violet ointment or linseed oil is distilled, then the extraction is performed; I then apply pressure, and it stuns the nose when it is sneezing comes, and puts on the ear pieces of velvet or wool; and the ear is at ease.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	This treatment often comes out once; and if it does not come out, then the extraction is performed with fine tweezers, and this is its form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the tweezers, it's good; if not, then perform extraction with a small, sharp forceps; and if it does not jump out, then make a cut in the eyelid and pull out the head of the candle or the ear hole, and stun it when it is at the wax candle so that it cannot enter with the eyelid; then the piercing is formed, as we said, if it comes out once in this way; and if it does not come out in this way, then take some glue on your fingers and put any instrument that is not sharp enough to make the piercing, and put a cotton ball inside; then press the glue at the piercing or whatever it is, and pull out the piercing.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she does not jump from all these things that we have said, if you hold her ear tightly even if it causes spasm, and the manner of the fever is that the patient of the head has less pain according to the strength, then place the patient's head between your hands and turn the ear towards the noise, and make a small prick at the root of the ear in the fat or the dependent part; and let the prick be as a moon, as you go to the point, then the bone according to your power, and the saliva comes to your mouth; and the cure as soon as it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain that is in and it bursts, then give the extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, then give the I spatumile tenve subtil according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and give the incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make the dislocation if you think that the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, as long as you have made many pieces; then extract it with soft pincers and gum, as we have said, if the extractions are healing.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear, therefore, if the grain is in the ear, then the surgeon must use a cotton dressing for the first time and make the ear wide.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let's be careful with that same ear or the eye.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps for this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If she jumps for this, it's good. If she doesn't, then pierce several times according to the length of your finger, and burn them slightly; and put the physician's hand on her ear, and pull out a few drops of blood from her ear, and take some from another part of her ear, and make a hole in the same place as the one that was made in the ear; and continue doing this until the ear is completely healed, and when she jumps, do it again; and if you see, if it doesn't work, then take one of the fingers in the ear, and the other finger in fire as soon as the pain becomes more intense; then make another hole in other parts as much as the pain becomes more severe, until the ear is completely healed, as we have said in the ear.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the tooth, if it is small, like a flea and similar, it is treated as we have said in the division; but if it is large, one can feel it, if the extraction of forceps is not done properly; and this is the lighter thing to do in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of the ears' jewelry, if you treat it as we have said in the division and without distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then look at the ear with the sun: if there are no holes, if you take fine forceps, and if there are, if you take the hook of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow and wide.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And draw out the more subtle part of the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient endures, then form it into a total ear; do this often as often as you can.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not yield to the pricking, then dip the cotton ear in the way we have described in the incision of the verse; and you will find or use distillations that the ancients have used in the decision of the verse; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with this instrument, then the form will be as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	1. And let silver or gold be melted into the small holes of the instruments, and then pour it over them; and when you see the distillation in the well-made silver instrument, and use the rasor and wrap it around the point of the needle; then let your oil or juice glisten or drip from the ear; then remove the rasor from all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil has distilled or come out of the ear; and it will feel to the patient that the medicine is warm, and so is the distillation in the fire; and keep it from being too cold, as the medicine will not work well if it's too cold.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the shaking of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some ear infection; and this same thing happens due to shaking of the head or from a hard blow to the ear, and these shaking does not occur once in the ear, if one cannot see; and never has there been any pus, and it is seen as well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes out of it, if one cannot see it, is a sign of the cure in many other situations, and in this case, it is necessary to put the ear that is sore with the salve; and look at: if you see the ointment apparent, then the olive has completely cured this swelling of the ear.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And so it is and cutting in front and behind all around, if it does not hurt the ear; if the exudate is of char or cors of the ear, if the hand as subtle pincers, and a light cape, as long as that char is entirely out.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the exudate is fully in the ear, then take a soft, light razor and gently scrape it, then put on a small amount of fire-scorched wax, then it is in the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the exudate that the patient feels is gritty in the ear, softly pierce, and be careful not to hurt the ear nerves; then put into the ear a tent according to the large opening of the ear, and the powder in the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Do nothing until the wound is sore, or take a tent and moisten it with hot rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it; and if you see the ear coming out, cover the tent with another soft tent made of oil of rose and wax, as long as the ear comes out; then apply the cure as soon as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	2. If the wound drains blood, dip a sponge in cold water and wrap it around the ear, and put it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the discharge of pus which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu com
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Here is the translation of the sentence: "If the hairs that come from papers are wet and dry, then it is necessary to stretch them with needles and tweezers, and place them on a spatula of its roots; then put on the leg a vitreous paste.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	Here is the translation of the sentence: "And if without decorticating, if the cautery subtle lenticular, and the cautery after the incision is good; and many times are repaired, nothing is devastated from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the gallows
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, things come in papers from the eyes that seem like gritty things in their form and hardness, and for this disease is called "granule," and it is an assembly of moisture large in the paper of these and soaked; the eyes are as follows: make sure if the granule moves on both sides, and it is a light thing to know; then make it wide, then scorch each part slightly, then take it with pincers, and the cape.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	1. If you do not feel the paper with your hand, it does not matter if it hurts the patient; and if the wound is large, if it can be stitched together, and the care is done as soon as it is healthy; and if it is small, if no force is applied, because the remaining part will regrow on its own.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	2. If the snow is descending towards the inner ear and covers the part below, if reversed, and the snow is grasped with tweezers, and presses from both sides; and if the paper is moved by incision, it does not hurt; and when the snow is removed, if the oily salt is leveled, and the skin of the patient is cared for as much as possible while the malaide is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is obtained from the papers of the sheets, and this happens more as the children grow older, and it harms their hair, and they come to the candles in the mornings, and cannot see the light of the sun because the tears come to their hair; and for this they lie on their backs, and sleep, and are the sheets soaked with the exinach that the enflame and the appearance has covered with the exinach that is open in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you need to press the sheet against your two and feel the exinach inside of it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	1. The manner of the incision is when the patient places his head in your hand; then take a cloth from linen and make a circle according to the number of stitches each part contains, then place it over it; press with your two hands on both sides, so that the stitches are assembled inside the circle; then make a small cut in the middle of the wound, not larger than the wound you make at the end of the incision; then stitch as much as you can see in the wound; and in other ways, exudation comes from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of greasy white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	1. Remove the arrow entirely from all pieces of cloth between your two hands, and turn your left and right hands as widely as possible; and ensure that you do not pull on the fletching, that you do not touch any other part of the shaft, and that you do not break it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	2. If the arrow does not open at the beginning of the furrow, lightly open it as soon as it appears; then remove it as we have said, and dry the cloth thoroughly and quickly, and place it on the wound, and bandage well.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	3. And if such men who have swollen heads and put oil on the moisture that is dried out,
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the cure, as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there comes to the abscess aposteme chaut, then the cure with plasters as long as he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs of papers are grown other than nature, and are unraveled, if they harm the eyes, and bring on diseases such as usual tears and softening of the paper and albugine, as long as it is due to the destruction of the hairs; and the cure is done in four ways: either by burning together with fire, or by medicine according to what is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and is made by cutting and stitching or by needles, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient's shoulder in your hand, then turn the paper of the oil to your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then insert an awl into all the holes of the thread; and let the margin of the paper or the hair that comes from these hairs be on the left side of the paper, and turn the thread up; then cut off the part at the end of the paper, at the end of the hair, all around, from the largest to the smallest; then pull out the thread, and put a small piece of cotton and ribbon on the paper, then run your finger along the paper as if it were a needle, and if you see the figure is according to the quantity that you see rising the paper that is marked with a dot.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If a part of the body has been injured and requires a large amount of paper according to its size, then cut out all the lines you have written, starting with the largest loop at the beginning. Then, begin with a small loop just next to the natural hair follicle as it grows in size, then pull out the root at one of the two angles, then scrape off the entire thing. Then, assemble the two lips together with a stitch made by an needle point at every strand of fine thread, and remove the suture, and clean up any excess threads on the two scales at any place, if you see this done. And if not, then leave the stitch and threads as is for three or four days; then treat the wound with a stitch made of dried and contracted things, because the paper relieves the pain and assembly of the wound, but the stitch is too tight (as they say the ancients), and it is overlooked due to fear; and if in another way: and if you see the paper of a figure that is as large as the fur of a marten, according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then comes he who surpasses in equal measure according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	Then comes he who surpasses in equal measure according to the form that is here: If you cannot hold the nails, and the thing is not even, then take a needle or a thread, and make the hole; and take another thread of the same length for the large arm, and a shorter one for the small, and assemble them correctly between your two hands; then gently press with your hand, and gently sew all the edges where you have signed, as we have experienced, then stitch the lips of the wound by sewing, and treat it until it is healthy; and if the suture comes to your incision, if the ache and swelling are relieved; and never has the hair of the paper turned into something else: if you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The patient is treated for rabies if it follows this form: and you convert the paper and make it according to what I said, and then make the snakes by hand, and they are tied as subtly as the paper and the long stitches are; and cope as the heads of the parts you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above the paper of the oil, and tighten the snakes of the parts formed; and leave no others, and the skin that is stretched will become thin, wrinkled, and pricked as it can.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, and the treatment has force, then the cure as soon as it is healthy; and when the wound becomes sore, and if the paper is lifted, and no more hair is tied; and this is the form of the snakes you will make according to this figure and quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The first sentence to translate is: "The dislocation of the shoulder is such that you need a fine needle, and a thread of silk and fine; then assemble the heads and gently pull them apart, and make the ends of the threads long; then take another fine thread of silk lightly, and pull the threads; then put the tailor's needle in your hand; and if the dislocation is declined, it is a subtle one and small, then cut the needle through all the threads at the root of the natural hair, and draw it out on paper as much as you can while you pull the natural hair; then pull the hair until it comes out at the root, and cut in the root that hair, if there are I, II, III or more; then pull your hand as the hair comes out all over the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	When the fur is treated and the hairs do not grow with it, if you neglect the grooming at the end of the hair, as long as the hair does not grow thick and you see it through your vision; then if you neglect the grooming and the hair, close the oil and leave the hair closed for 2 or 3 days, as long as the hairs grow in their place and the tail is born; and if the hairs are short, then accompany one long hair with the natural tails, and take it with the one you let go, as long as it is elongated and then lay it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the oil's fat
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or oil comes in the form of grease, it can occur in two ways: naturally and unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes from wounds, or cuts, or burns, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of the wound is to cut it off, and cleanse the lips, and put on linen tents, and keep them until they are healed; and nothing else is needed in the care of the wound but things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	If you do this, the disease will become worse than the first; but if you do things that are harmful, like figs; and the root of wormwood or any other seed, and all oils are melted in none of them, and they envelop a tent, and the cure for this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you give in guard that it does not sound like according to its form as it was before; and these operations that we have said are none that can cure this disease, that it does not recur according to its form as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the horse that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease called "axacrati" is truly an accidental and natural one.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and burns and cauterization and things similar; and the view of the shoulder is that you see an aguille, if it has double fil, and the hole in the shoulder, and it feels like a larmier on the opposite side as much as on the other, so that the filz comes in the II chiés of the shoulder; then the shoulder is at desus all the aguille, and the cope is in the spatumile large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if it seems that the paper returns according to what it should, that is good; but if not, then take a razor and put it in the fire, and turn the paper, and make as many furnaces as the paper demands; and let the ends of the two angles of the incision you have made be such that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were a letter without "I griesche"; then heat it according to the quantity that your fire can bear, of which that teaches the paper, then adjust the remaining parts, and cut them with a thread of linen; then cure what we have said about the mollifying medicines and tents, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	When the disease comes from frost or wind or burn, if it comes that you cut a smooth frost from the hair of the papers, according to what is before; then draw between the two legs of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the form of the disease, because it is of different shape in form, and the skilled masters arrange the tools of all things according to their natural figure; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for cutting and excising in more positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	I do not understand this phrase. Could you please provide more context or clarify what you are asking?
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture comes to the hands of women in such a way that the paper on it is stuck with white of the oil, and cannot move or do its natural functions, then it comes to pass that you cut the point of a razor with the paper desensitized, and gently lift it up; and the tweezers, as long as you touch what is inserted into the subtle spumice which is neither too much nor too thin, so that the patient does not suffer from the spumice too much or the oil becomes wet; and your incision, which you scrape of that assembled one, gently if the paper returns to its natural form; and it heals all assembled, and never once in the acrid cold oil, and levies it with sweet cold oil, and the levier linen; then put between the paper and the oil a layer of fine linen, and put on top of the oil fine soft wool in abundance; and afterwards let the third day use dry and things soothing until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the oil of the finger
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways in which the finger is affected: it is nervous and resembles hard skin, and another that is not nervous but resembles frozen wax, which when touched with iron and cooked with pincers, if it does not open; and both resemble the great terror, and grow pores and pores more and more until the entire vision and light and movement of the oil disappears.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision if the patient places his head in the right position, then he operates on the finger; and take a piece of paper with your hand, then take a small forceps, and hold the finger at the end; then take an awl, and insert the horsehair, or sheephair, or beefhair, and the strong thread; and double the point of the awl a little and the thread enters the finger, and perforate all the awl, and tie the finger with a thread and pull it out, and scrape all the hair from the costeit of the finger which touches the prunelle and the silk at the chief, then cut off the remaining in the root of the arm as small forces as possible, and leave the natural or harsh, so that by the incision there comes no tears; and never has the finger been stiffened only, and over time, as we have said; then it is scrubbed on all the spatumile so that the form is:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Keep the suction from touching the charred skin and breaking it, and make sure the prick does not pierce; then after cutting, a little oil is poured on the scar, and a dressing made of linen cloth is applied, and it is left for the other day; then the care for what needs to be done until it is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	1. If the nail is not too nervous, and you do not push the needle, and the unguis cannot enter, it is often treated with this appearance of a nail of medicines; and I have seen many times in the division, and if you see it cope, if you apply oil to the light point of the needle according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	1. And gently remove the nail, and if you see that it does not cause any swelling and the ration is pressed, then distill from your mouth into the oil made of litargire and red coliere rouge and seil broiet, and it smokes over to the other day; then resume the other wound according to this same work, until it is entirely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. If nothing is against you in the oil, as with aposteme chaus, then the milk, and first treat the aposteme chaut until it is healthy, then resume the wound as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is pale in the oil due to great consumption, and in cop a part and not all, that there are no tears; then it distills into the oil that is reddish and bitter, which is made from litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that was squeezed under the prune
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men never bleed red flesh, and crush the prunes and wrap them in papers and twist them, and it looks like a rose of a dragon; and if the heads are such that the patient's skin is wet, then he puts his hand on the skin, then he cuts the ears, and takes all this red flesh as uncut pieces as possible, and holds it with strength; then cut the first ear, and take all of it to the razor until the end, and keep the oil from the incision; and the incision of a spatula that we have said in the incision of the thumb and small forces of the hand if it is like this after this chapter shows; and when the incision is completed and takes all the flesh, then use the oil of silk or you distill red bitter and resembles medicines corrosive, and put on the oil with a piece of linen, if it is assured of aposteme chaut; and if it does not need anything, and the without hand passes over it, and you doubt aposteme chaut, if leaves the oil and cures aposteme of things calming aposteme chaut; then return to your incision as much as it is healthy, and then make other cuts in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you apply the care of every weak point in the natural way; and in the accidental way, in the fire cautery; and do not force your hand into any of these cauteries as long as you see that the other member is affected by that cautery.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Certain veins are red and covered with oil, and they hurt the eye and inflame the oil for all time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the first thing you should look at is the oil, and if it is red, it is bad, and there is no other disease but that of the oil; therefore, it is done in this way: instruct the patient to put his head on your shoulder, then stretch those veins all over according to his wisdom, and make them subtle according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be cut in degrees of one course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then use your force to remove those hairs subtly, and let the blood flow after another, as long as you can see the hairs leaving the skin; and do not cut the skin with sharp points of the razor, and make this incision at noon before the sun, and be careful in your incision so that you do not cut further than the hairs; and when you have done this, distill the oil into a green and red color to corrode what is left on the skin.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot cut all of it in that hour, make a plaster with the oil of things that soothe the pain of the hairs, and leave some parts until the pain is soothed and the swelling is reduced, then resume according to this method as soon as it is safe; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the oil fissure
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	If the wound is called an "arissati" fissure, then treat it with a fire cautery and according to the medicine of burning ague as I have mentioned before. If it is not healed, then cut into the area where the incision was made, and if there is any bleeding, remove all the moisture that is in it, until the wound is discovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the wound is discovered, and you see corruption and darkness, if all the instruments of this case are of the same form; and it is called "spry chief", and should be made firm in the chief, and should be sharpened like a lime if it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	1. And place the end of the bone of the corrupt bone, then twist it between your two hands, and press your hand a little as you feel that corruption is removed; and do this no more than once, then restore the bone of medicinal excisions.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	2. If the wound is seen, and it is painful, and the belly is seen, and it remains for 40 days, and it does not heal or become gangrene, and accidents do not occur, if you are sure that it is healthy; if not, then there is no other way than to return the fistula to the nose according to this form: and that you remove from the bone the second time by cutting and by medicines that cause ague, and when it is discovered that it has a fever according to this form, and so the head of the iron is at an angle of 3, and the fistula is as thin as possible so that you see it like this:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place the lancet on the handle of the scalpel, and move your hand away from the oil hole as much as possible, then turn the entire forehead until it pierces the bone and feels the pain due to the force that the patient holds their hand on their nose; and then restore the dry medicine leg with which I have shown you, and when the patient nods and hardens the legs, if the matter is in the nose; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the oil's exit
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the wound is fully open and there is no discharge from the nose, and it does not become worse, then you must apply the salve to the patient; then put on gauze or bandage that does not hurt by being too tight, then put on oil I linen made of acacia and aloe and cinnamon and sarcocolle, and then apply it to the wounds and the dressings; if the dressings are too moist, double each one by four, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount that the patient has used; then apply the bandages in a way that forms squares, and resume the ventouses to squeeze without hurting; then take off the ventouses and leave the oil tightened overnight and the next day, if you see the wound healing, it is good; but if not, then repeat the application of the bandages and the oil and the ventouses as long as it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Great shock of the eyelid
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When there is a shock in the eyelid, it opens wide and throws off small pieces of skin like resin; therefore, close your eyes and cut a thin thread at the root of the affected part, then cut another thread if there is a double thread in the part; and make sure, and leave the first thread according to its position, then cut the double thread and pull out a part of the eyeball, and hold it firmly, then remove the thread and put some ointment on the inside of the eyelid as much as the threads stick to the eye; and leave it until the threads are no longer stuck to the eyelid, and cure the ointment with comforting things as long as the wound is healing; and never again will the wound be restricted by any part of a circular piece of cloth as soon as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs grow long and coarse, if they are pricked with a sharp needle that comes from the oil, and the moisture is driven out and the hairs fall out, and it heals; then they are plucked as soon as they are healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the oil's bow
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is only bowels assembled in the oil, resembling a sharp descent, but it is not sharp; and the manner of appearance of the disease if you make the patient sit at the side and right, then take the chief between your hands of II parts, and pull as much as you see the bowel coming to the desus of your hairs; then it is clean, and does not descend and is not combed out, and see the maladies things as if it was; and if it does not descend, say that it is sharp, and if the bowel descends is not assembled so as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you place the patient between your hands, then take the sharp spatula and make a small incision on the corneal surface, as far as the conjunctive continues with the cornea and the sclera, until the fluid comes out. And when it is done, if it distills in cold water mixed with honey, or hot ginger, then it should be treated with another remedy until it is cured.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the resemblance of the waters in the division, and when it is necessary to measure; if according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you hold the patient's hand tightly between your own, using the light of the sun, and feel the healthy and firm oil; then place the paper of the oil on your left hand so that the hairs are in order; or on your right hand so that the hairs are disordered; then take in your right hand, if the hairs are in order, the instrument called "almagda"; or in your left hand, if the hairs are disordered; then place the point of the instrument at the coronet through the largest part of the oil in the blenchor of the oil in the smallest part of the arm; then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and pull your hand as much as it penetrates the blenchor of the oil, and feel that almagda is working on the empty thing; and the measurement of the almagda hole should be at the end of the nose; and this is the coronet of the oil; if you see the bone in the paper for the clarity of the corner of the eyelid, and then place the instrument where it is needed, and press the oil firmly after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If it is now swollen, if he sees the surgeon before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After the patient has rested for a short time, and if the swelling returns to the second duct, take the forceps with the instrument, and when they are firmly held and do not move, gently twist your hand a few times; then place a piece of cloth soaked in warm oil on the swollen part.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply warm oil to the soaked cloth or powdered ointment with enough urine and bind with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those of us who are ours, we put on like poultry with much urine.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the maggot cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because it lacks the necessary soft hairs, then you must use an instrument called "alberit" which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And by perforating only the conjunctive, and not too deeply, but making a small opening, then insert the maggot, as we have said; and at the end of the operation, the patient will feel some pain in the eye, and it will be dark in the socket; and you should make no movements, and feed light foods, and do not move the head to the left or right, and keep it according to its own disposition; then close the wound in this house of darkness, and examine your eyes, and show the patient any interesting things, and then replace the link as soon as possible after the ninth day; but it is necessary that you do this in the eye of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you remove it, because the swelling increases rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When the wound is stitched, you should gently apply oil to the stitch before the ninth day, and then cover it with a piece of cloth or linen to prevent any infection. Once it is healed, remove the stitch and cover it with a clean cloth or linen.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then, you should make a small incision in the house and convert it into its case; and advise that no disciples should undergo this procedure.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Then, some came from the region of Yrach who told us that in some places it was used as a remedy for the measles, but we have never seen any in our land, nor have we ever read about it in ancient books; and by chance, this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of amalgama, because those who do not know them properly; and they are truly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And be the heads of these same subtleties, and the tail in third angles ahead.
de la char sor le neis	of the sword and the knee.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No swords and knees are ever born or broken, and if there are any that seem like scorpions at the mouth of the foot; and if they are of such a kind or have a sword enchanced with flesh color, and if it is a sword of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these swords which are not enchanted, and do not mie, it is necessary that you make the patient lie between your hands in the sun; and work on his nostrils, and cut the horn on those swords, and take them away; for that is what you can sustain in the subtle spatumile of one part, as long as you see that the sword is all steeled.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If there is nothing else that can be done, and you examine all the wounds subtly and lightly, if it does not cause any harm; and if it does not cause any pain or swelling, and if it is not malignant, then cauterize as much as possible and burn until the wounds are charred and all the bones are burned, then gently touch it with wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If you can operate, and moisture comes to the palace, signifying that it is healthy; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, signifying that it has charred in the bone of the wound, or that the wounds cannot be trimmed: therefore it is necessary to bind a piece of linen around the wound, using our hands, and it should be between every other nail or less; and put the surgeon's thread through the head of the nail as it grows, and tie it with odorant as it comes out of the mouth; and many times do this to the child in schools, and it is a light thing for him who sees it done; then hold the chief that comes through the nail with one hand, and the other chief that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and follow it after each other as we have seen.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	1. Until you know that the child has corrupted the char, then take the boy's penis, clean it, and make him urinate, and put the urine in an Egyptian poultice, and put it back in the urethra as before; do this 3 times or more, until the poultice corrodes all that is left of the char; then put a catheter made of cork for some days until it is healthy, and if he has knowledge of dried herbs, then use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the child's penis, or when it is distilled, the oils and medicines or urine.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	1. And let it be of silver or gold, resembling an overturned lamp, like a dog, and lead it thus; and if you see, if I make a dog close, and it has empty paws to expel the head, and have a handle for the head to hold when one heats the oil or no liquid.
de la char sor le neis	2. of the char and the neck.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	3. Many times the head is affected with a disease called "telul", and grows and becomes large, until it is seen when looked at; and therefore it is necessary to cut at the beginning, and make the bone all raw, then put on the fire cautery or hot medicine; and if it is delayed as long as it is large, if it is hard, of a dark color, poor sense: if it is not touched by iron because it is enchanted, for when one touches it never comes any harm to the patient; and if the enchantment is of silver, not of iron, you will see that it can be covered, if the patient is cold and the cure is painful, and cure the patient of things drying and restricting.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated and reset
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is said that when solutions for continuation come from one of these cartilages, it does not last long and is not beneficial to any man.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore to look at whether the wound is fresh at all its base; and then close the lips with a bandage, and treat it until it is healthy; and if the lips are already swollen on both sides, it is necessary that you scrape off all the parts of it as they become healthy, and then close the lips with a bandage, and extract, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and burn incense; and put some pieces of a plaster of gold or other soothing plaster on the powder, and leave it until it sticks to it, and then treat the ointment as it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing if you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the belly stitching; or by thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips' abscesses
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	The lips' abscesses often cause pain, resembling grains of sand, and become larger or smaller; therefore, you should open the lips, and cut them asunder at each nose, and take out the pieces with tweezers and sew them in each part; then use the lee after the incision of vitriol, as long as it is not soaked; and then the lee of ointment, and cure the lip with dry things until it is sound.
de la char des gencives	Of the horse's knee
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the knee cap has been injured in the horse's knee; what they call "albulus"; if you hold it with your fingers, and the root of the nail, and let go of the bone or sinew; then put on leather vitriol powder, or other restraining and desiccant powders; and if the knee cap returns after the incision, and many times it happens, if the cap is second time, and cauterized: if it does not return soon after the cautery; and these are the forms of strums in the horse's knee.
des sordens	of stones
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	1. No times are assembled at the head of the teeth, teeth between the cheeks, gums that are ugly and sharp; and no times is the black and yellow and crooked tooth, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and it becomes the yellow tooth; if you want to place the dentist between your hands, and its chips are in your holy, and open the teeth or gums as much as possible, until nothing more is done; and then I make black and green, and brown and other stains, as long as they are visible; and if this is in the first reason, it's good; but if not, if you repeat the second day and tooth, as long as you have everything back; and advise that the teeth have the ability to different forms of estructions to laugh, according to what the demonstration shows, because the raser that cleans the teeth has other shapes than those shown in the teeth; and these forms and others are with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	1. It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay and do not neglect it as much as possible, because it should not be made; for it is a substance of high juice therefore there is no excuse to delay.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	2. When the patient is forced to bear pain, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth's will.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	3. Many times the patient's pain is endured, and it must be made sure that the tooth is in its place, and the tooth is burned; and it will not depart from the pain as long as the mouth is open, because we have already wanted to do this for these better ones; and when you are certain of the tooth's will, if you must scrape off all of the tooth, then use a spatula firmly to guard the gum of all parts; then the mouth has your needles at the first part and again, as they are well inserted, then they confirm the needles; and the head of the tooth is in your hand between your fingers, and it must be held so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the broken tooth, and if it does not break further, then take none of these strips and gently pull out from each side, and move it as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the teeth are felt and drawn out, then it is necessary to fill them with cloth, whether the holes are large or small; and if the extraction is done subtly with needles, which does not break the tooth; and it is wise to over the gum for removing the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be well prepared that you do not break the tooth, and there remains a part, and it goes to the patient through the malice of the root, more great pains of the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	1. And you should know that what they do is not like what ignorant healers do, who break the charm with their haste and their hardiness, and never cause any harm to anyone except what we have counted; but they cause it once by the agony of this great disease, either because of the roots they cut, or because of the charm they break, just as often as we want; and when the poison is in, if you wash the leeward with wine or alum and silk, and it comes out, it often comes out, if you use wine or vitriol; and if it does not come out, if it is cauterized.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tooth extractions, whether they are the first teeth or not, are long and wide at the tips and have large handles, so they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of large size if they do not break when pulled, and they should be made of good iron, and they should have teeth to hold onto.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root of the tooth is broken during extraction, if it comes to pass that you put your finger into the hole with a soft cloth wet in warm water for a while.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the hole is smoothed, then pull out the points that are called "algefri", even if the head looks like a beak; and they should be made in the same way as a lime and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out through all these tines, then you must pull the root as far as possible, and then insert the instrument called "althali", which is a type of plow, with this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is very large and does not break the skin, and the root jumps over this, it is good; but if not, then you can use all the force you have, with these forms following:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you can use this instrument with two razors, then the form is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other forceps that are in front of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like large pins, with this form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And so it is that the bone does not break, and the tools are sharp; and also other bones, which are not as strong; and the masters make the joints true by themselves with their own instruments, according to what their work and the disease demonstrate, for they have some diseases or the ancients did not teach any instrument for the diversity of bones or they break not at the right place or other bones, or they porridge, if he seeks the bones that he needs, and helps with gestures, as follows is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and grasp; and then restore the part of medicines corresponding to this, and if there is in the bone porridge, and it is small, if all this instrument is:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears to not fit naturally in the gum, and it is misshapen, and even more so in women with multiple teeth, it comes to pass that you must cut away the tooth after the gum, and it is not rightly placed, and it cannot be sewn or merged: therefore, the gum; and if it is close with the tooth, then use this instrument whose form is like the small beak, and it should be of hard steel made sharp:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cut is quickly and quickly with your hands due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be merged, then you can merge it with a piece of gum like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is like the making of the eyes, and in the bone there is little and little by hands lightly, so that it does not move at all when it chicles; then the plain at the end has no rasor, and the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, if it is made as even as possible, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth are loose by pressure or by chewing, and the patient cannot press on it because it pains, and you treat them with restraining medicines, and it does not work; if it is restrained by a golden thread, for the silver wire becomes green and rots, but the gold does not hurt; and the thread should not be too thick or too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth, take the thread and the string double between the healthy teeth, then put the strings between the bad teeth, as long as you see improvement in the healthy tooth; then resume the covering on the part where you began, and gently and wisely move your hand, so that it does not move at all; and if your thumb is on the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	1. Then, the head of the nail is held by some needles, and they are assembled, and placed between the healthy tooth, and it is inserted as not to damage the tongue; and then it is left as narrow as it can be, and if it does not move, or the filaments come out, if the forceps are pulled by another thread; if it stays and serves for all its strength, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the incisors of the second healthy teeth and the second molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	2. And when the tooth is set, if it is moved in its place, slightly, as we have said; and it does not become loose, nor is it painful, and never takes on the shape of a bone of a mare's hoof, and it is placed in the socket where it was, and if it fails, and is tightened as we have said, and it lasts and serves for all its strength:
de coper lou liien de la lengue	From the copper wire of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No time is lost that comes from the tongue or nature; or by accident of wounding; and the ovary is such that it opens the mouth of the midwife, and has its head in her mouth, and loosens the tongue; then cope the wire nervous large, as long as the tongue is loose from its hold, and if it bites or nout, and that is due to pain, if it bites the uncinate and cope large the other side; and keep that the fanger does not become too much too soon, for the artery that is out of place; and when you have done, if the leu is red and inflamed, or cold, then put the lingue between two linen tents; and the midwife will touch the patient's tongue every night, that the patient may be soothed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the dislocation occurs, if the patient is in pain, and if the cauterization is done slowly at the fire cautery, which is suitable for this, then the treatment of another treatment as soon as it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that it is reddish or black and the patient does not feel pain, if it is not touched, because it is gangrene; and if it is declining into a blenchor, and it has moisture, if it oozes pus, and it forms a subtle spumous substance, and it delivers from one part and another; and if the patient does not feel pain in your care, if you apply vitreol broth as much as it is inflamed, then return to your care as soon as you treat all parts; then raise the leg with ailis and seal, and the treatment of other treatments as soon as it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat's abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Never comes a gangrene of the throat's abscesses called "godath", and they are properly known as the "hammands". When you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not healthy, then keep them: they are hard, small in size, and pus-colored, if they do not touch iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, if it does not touch iron, then for the evacuation of blood; but let it remain until it is dead, and then you will take it out; and if it is of a bluish color and the root is fine, if you have prepared the instrument to cover it, but first look to see whether the abscess has closed and is quiet.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then fasten the patient in front of the sun, and let their head be in your hand, and make them open their mouth and press their tongue between their fingers, and press the lower lip evenly all around the instrument, regardless of whether it is made of silver or gold:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue evenly all around the instrument, and see if the incision is deep, then take the canine and the thumb in your mouth, and pull it towards the nail, and keep pulling until it comes out more than you put it in; and do not take anything from the tail with you, then place the instrument in the forceps, and regardless of whether it is made of silver or gold, it seems to have strengths; and all the teeth are sharp, and one part is against another, and they are very jagged, and it is made of iron or bronze:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, if you have needles, then the form is as follows:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	Then, make a cut on one side and label the other end; when you have cut one of the hairs, cut the other in the same manner, and after making the incision, heat the blade with hot water, and wipe it dry, and if the hair comes out, if the hair is cooked, or if it is a piece of pomegranate rind that is cooked, or if it is a piece of mirtle, and similar things, until the blade is not stained; then cure it as soon as it is healthy; and never have any other abscesses born in the mouth than the two hairs, if you cut them like the two hairs.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	I am treating a woman with a wound that was causing her to choke on her food, which is called anaphylaxis; I had closed almost the entire throat, so she could not breathe through the tube that was blocked by saliva, and could not drink or eat, and she died if she stayed in this state for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The wound was very severe, and I had to remove it with two incisions.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then removed the tooth and took out a large portion of the jawbone; I then removed another piece from the other socket, and closed the mouth and pressed on the tongue; after removing the tooth in these wounds, and taking out a small part, and only a little blood came out of the woman's throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop trimming the wound with long cuts; the wound gradually closed and filled the socket that I had made, so that it did not leak much; therefore I closed and cauterized the gum: after that, she recovered; I left these parts, and only God could do more for her.
de l’uve	From the urethra
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it comes out of the urethra, and it is long and thin, it is called 'perpendicular'; and if it is very large and curved, it is called 'the urethra'.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the incision does not benefit, and you see that the cauterant is soothing and subtle, and it is suitable to copulate; and that which is curved and not long is assembled and not far; and it is bloodshot or of a red or black color, and you should discard the incision of the wound.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, as I have said, to consider the patient's gut and length, that you place the patient in front of the sun, and press the tongue on the instrument we made note of before; then the forceps in the eye, and pull it out, and cut at the two points I mentioned in the incision of the two amandines.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, you will hurt your voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two amandines, and cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of pain, then you must use an engine for the burning of the painful part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of burning is sharp and quick.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should place his head on your hand, and then press his tongue onto the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and confess with a sharp, living force; if it is not too thick or too clear, then use the edge of this instrument, and its form is:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has a lock of hair or a piece of medicine, as the teeth of a comb, and place the instrument in all the medicine on the eyeball; and the patient should be anxious about his chest, if the saliva and the mucus flow from his mouth with the medicine, if it does not reach the chin and neck, then keep your hand on all the medicine and press on the eyeball, as much of the half of an hour as you see the pain and the medicine's sting is eased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton with the medicine, and push the instrument through the cotton in the tail of the catheter, as much as the cotton dries on the eyeball; and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and after four or five hours or six, if you have skill to renew the medicine cauterization, if it restarts, and after the cauterization of the medicine, wrap the pus around the eyeball with cotton, and clean what is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and use gargles as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, only cauterization; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamus and sassafras and origin and chamomile and avon and similar herbs, and all or none of them in one pot, and mix, and make boil; and it can be well glued with hard earth, and the pot should have the instrument made according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it can be of silver or gold, and one of the heads is inserted into the mouth of the patient as much as the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, as long as the eye is anesthetized; after that, it often resumes, as long as the eye dries, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the onset of abscess gangrene, because many things come; and do not make this but at the decline of abscess gangrene.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	If this instrument is not present, then take a needle and sew the head of the shoulder with a thread of yarn, if the mouth of the patient has too much saliva; for the thread of yarn does not wet the tongue, and it is a good cure together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it has happened to the throat, either with a bone or a fish spine, or nothing at all; therefore, if you must see what is there, and press the tongue against the instrument as far as possible, so that you can see the thing; and if you do not open the mouth, it is necessary to make the patient vomit until the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance, if the thing is cleared through vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and then wrap it around the sponge, and then glutinate it; and when it reaches the mouth, if it opens, and then draw it out; and if it does not open from what we have said, then take the instrument of plucking according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	1. And let the forceps be placed at the root if possible, so that it may more lightly enter the mouth; keep the head upright; and avoid touching the epigastrium, as all will vomit; and make sure that the instrument does not pierce the bone; and if it does, either draw it back or pull it further along the instrument evenly, until it is fully inserted.
de la sansue de la gorge	2. of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	3. No time is lost in medicine when the throat is unobstructed, as I have said in the division, by the use of medicines; and when this does not help, look at the mouth of the patient in the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I have given you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the joint, if it has all its small bones, or if it has thin nails that are worth this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it is not worth it, if you take a hair of the dog, and pull on the mouth of the patient, then pull or cut the hair and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And the patient's face is covered with sweat all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full advantage of seeing cold sweat, and open the mouth, and the throat feels it is being swallowed, and move it often; and if the joint soon feels the heat, then do.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If she does not understand as we have said, if the patient smokes tobacco, with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, as it will give relief.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	If the manner of the fumigation is that you prefer to use or if there are charcoals visible, and it is placed inside a covering of a cloth in the environment, and in that place is the head of the instrument; then perform your fumigation, and the patient places the end of the cainne in his mouth, closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not enter, but comes out the nose; and the nose will now be cleared, and if it does not clear, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and drink salty and bitter things, and do not drink water; and then perform the task that you performed with this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument used to treat the gouge, if it is, when one can see, resembles tacks corbets to enter the mouth; and it resembles the beak of a surgeon, and has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and then the form is:
li chapistres des apostemes	The cauteries of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The appearances of the abscesses are, according to what is remembered in this book, and they are different in perforation and size; and there are two ways, one of which is its own appearance, and for that it is moist.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method if by the legs or if they are in the course.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the head of the chief is different from that of the foundation, and the head of the lower limb is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if in the judgment of the head there is no perception, as long as the bow is dead according to its accomplishment; and if for such things it is necessary to perceive when they are thought to be, and do not die according to their accomplishment, as much as those that are joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when the head comes from joints, and it is left as it is until it is completely erect, by chance if the ligament and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, because this is due to contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	1. If the wound is deep into the member, and you delay the piercing as long as possible, it will harm the primary member; or if it is the foundation, and the hole is not made until it is dead, then it is the foundation that cannot be made, and it may cause a fistula to open and become long-term; and it cannot heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	2. It is necessary that you clean the wound of the piercing of the cautery that is dead according to the completion, and when the pain is calmed, when the fever subsides, when the pain and bruising are eased, and there is a lot of sweating and restlessness, and the agitation of the head of the cautery, and other signs; and it is necessary that you sew the piercing or more dependent on the cautery, and where it was opened; and it should be a long wound, and if the cautery is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all of them equally or not, without clotting.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those places where they prick, according to the member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the flesh, if it is painful, then let the puncture remain until it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you prick it beforehand, and the gall comes out of it, and it is painful to touch; and by chance they harden the lips and become more ugly from it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is no abscess that is pricked according to the size of the gall, according to what the member can bear.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you prick small abscesses, small pustules; and in large abscesses, large pustules, and many fangs according to the appearance of the abscess; and if in such abscesses or they are hard to touch, and close; when they become as hard as I am, and are dried out, then it is necessary to do so as with bubbles: and if in such cases that are cut at three angles, and if in such that are cut like the thorn of the marten, as with abscesses of the gall; and if in such that are made a small cut, and others of different sizes and appearances.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	1. Those who have no head, if it is only a superficial wound, it is necessary that you cut it gently; and when the wound is large and has a great hole, and it has pierced through the entire hole, but not all of it, then stop the wound in that hour, but in another part; then the wound stops at the other end, then no further damage is done; this is done many times with great care, as long as the hole is completely filled; at the same time, if the patient is weak in virtue, or a woman carries, or small children, or elderly people who are decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expectations have never occurred once with the end of the bowel, that by chance the patient died, and you do not blame yourself.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you notice your abscess, if the wound is large, look at the size of the abscess; and if it is small, use a linen or cotton gauze; and if it is large abscesses and there is fever, then tie each one with a piece of cloth so that one covers the other; and if you have scratched a part of leather with the abscess, and it has grown, then cover it with fine silk or rags of linen, and the edge, and the care of the ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	When the patient's temperature rises due to the fire cautery, if it becomes too cold and wet, and the skin is sore, and he should cover the affected area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient's temperature rises due to the fire cautery, and it becomes too cold and wet, and the skin is sore, and he should cover the affected area with many layers of clothing. If the patient's tongue is dry, and the eyes are nervous, then you should put on warm vinegar and oil-soaked bandages; if this is the case, and the lesion is charred, then you should put on wet vinegar and oil-soaked bandages, or wet wine and oil-soaked bandages, as we have said before; then remove the aposteme and the pus, and the cure, as it is necessary, until the patient is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	This comes when you have to know the overall treatment of abscesses: or you have said how one must come before the treatment of abscesses, and now this chapter.
des soros	of sore
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When sore wounds come and are like the bite of a grape vine, and are similar in appearance to this one.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	If it is fat and of such that it has moisture, or like the grape vine; and if it is such that it is hard and rough in the cutting, and it does not have doubt, then it will not be opposite.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the measurements of the size if it is that you stretch to all the instruments that are called "intermuscular," of which the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they are made longer by suspension.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is seen, it should not be shorn if it has any hair containing that moisture, because it will return again as soon as it is left alone; then dip the cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, use warm and cold water, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day; and they should treat whatever is dewormed.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the wound, as long as you see that it does not hurt any more at night; then treat the wound with ointment according to what is suitable, until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the cauterization is held in fat, and the cope according to this form, long; and it burns your bones, and scorches all parts, and puts all your care for drawing out the poultice or the wound; and if the artery is made opposite, then do as I have said after this.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And if I make the cauterization when it is purulent, and cut and cure as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cut is made after the cauterization when it is purulent and moist, if it is lighter, because there are few blood clots.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if at any of these cauterizations or burns or cuts there is no moisture, and these were the ones I made or were made by an old woman; and I found the cauterization like a sharp, rough, and bluish piercing, that could not be broken; and if none was made, it was as good as a wound like a piercing.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other cases, when an aposteme is present or chief, it is better that these which come as chief of the children and roots of the ears, the opening is made as soon as possible at the most dependent part of the ear, according to the size of the bowel; and they are cured as it is necessary.
des scrophules	of scrofuly
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times the aposteme is found at the collarbone, and the shoulder blades are dislocated, and the arms are broken, and never in any other part of the body, and they are mutilated and become unusable.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And every case of scrofuly is properly located on the side, just as the aposteme and chief are when they are present; and the appearances of these scrofuly are numerous.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	1. It has thicknesses that contain moisture, and if they are malicious and will not obey nature.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	1. In the one that you see in good disposition at the wrist, and is similar to the color of the cold corse, and is quiet in every part and not rough as the cold cold nerve, nor to the artery nor to the conduit, nor is it rough; if it comes that you cut it with a razor, and burn it in every part, and are the two lips of the knee as the bones, if you have the skill, as we have said in apothegms of the chief; and the hand is small and small, and you are sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and are not rough with the spatula and the trench, that the hands do not crack, and do not see too early, that you do not cut more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you touch the vein or artery, and it does not let you over, then put vitrol beads in the wound or any powders that stick to blood, and close the wound; and leave it until the abscess is relieved and the wound is soothed, and begins to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And if the wound is not healed, then return to your vein as soon as you can; then wait until your index finger tells you if it does not show any small pimples, whether the thumb and nails.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if the wound is a large pimple at its root, then you must only cut out that pimple at its root, but leave the other end of the thread double strong, and leave it hanging without causing any harm; then apply the wound with soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then the cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	If you cover the entire wound, and then assemble the two lips of the wound, and hold it now, before there is any excess due to the size of the wound.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you understand how to cover the root of it, and draw it out, and cut it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those wounds that have superfluity, perforate them or make them open; and perforate them as the one mentioned, depending on the size, then apply dressings with ointment and similar things, if it prevents further corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, if the cure of ointment makes it heal quickly, so that it is healthy.
de squinance	Of the skull
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and talked about the size of the neck; but I have never seen anyone in our world who does this, and it is the writing of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the incision of the throat called "epiglottis" be avoided; and this cannot be helped by it, because all the veins and the humors of the male patient are in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the ears.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the hard gums, it is necessary to cut off the epiglottis to avoid death that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to cut off the epiglottis, it is necessary to cut it at three or four points, passing through the two circles, according to the size of the incision; and they should be covered with cartilage; and then it is possible to cut off the epiglottis without injuring the throat, and the wounds will be long.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	When the masters are unable to manage, if it extends the jawbone all around the neck, then cut through the hair as much as possible until it reaches the cheek; and avoid the veins of the face, if you see nothing, and then cover the wound as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the broken bone that jumped from the leg that was broken, and due to the lack of voice; and leave the wound open with a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed, if you doubt the dislocation, assemble the two lips of the wound, and cover all the surface that is felt on the cartilage; then administer medicines that make the swelling decrease as much as possible until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim advises that as long as the throat is completely covered and the patient is unconscious, and the surgeons are deemed dead, then the operation can proceed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Adonques, it is advised to leave the incision open as long as the poison of the disease has not passed, and it will pass in three days or four. Therefore, it is commanded to cut the wound and treat it, once it is treated. And I will tell you what I see.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see that a young woman was cutting her throat and cut off a part of her eyelids, and I was called to cure her, but I found her as if she were dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discover the wound, and find the blood that came from it, and it was well that it did not lead to any vein or only to the throat, and it came out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried to the wound and cared for it as soon as it was healed; and it did not cause the maiden any harm, and she only returned to her position after speaking in a red voice; therefore I said that there is no pain in the trimming of the epigastrium.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This hernia is called "hernia of the throat," and it is large hernias of a pale color, and they are very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental; or natural has no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	The accident occurs in two ways, one resembling a large muscle, and the other is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; it is painful, and there is no way to overcome it except for a small force, and it proves and searches all the introducer: if you do it as I have thick muscles, and cannot in any way, if the cope, so as one copes with thick muscles, and takes all of its force, if it has not; and it is well done, and the cure as it should be, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	Of course, I understand your
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to ours, of which I will tell all the appearances; and it comes that I die all the difference that is between the newborn and the birth.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is chills and fever holding, as long as the agitations are past, and it has been accomplished by the diarrhea; therefore, the fever and the chill subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the newborn there is neither chill nor fever nor pain, and it contains I syfac, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the purple corse, and it begins thus like a boil, and becomes big; and they are according to the two appearances, either gray or moist, and the color is so as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	1. It is necessary, when you come to the cure of a newborn, that you examine and first ask about all the instruments called "dislocater" according to what their form comes or in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	2. The manner of examining the abscesses of the body is that you press or more moistly on the spot where you feel the abscess, and turn your two thumbs as much as you can until you think that the skin has given way, then that is according to the size of the abscess; then take out the dislocater, and hold it steady in the moment that you jump.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	When moisture occurs, it depends on the color it has, as I have said for other abscesses; and if no one comes to clean it after the incision, it is thick, so it is crossed with a cross, and taken with tweezers, and lightly burned at each point and the wound is washed with clean water; and if it is not cleaned properly, it is done in pieces so that nothing comes out.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it does not come out, it returns to us many times; and if it causes a wound, and it does not grieve, then use the wound with some corrosive powders, and tighten the wound, and put soothing things on the abscess, and cure other abscesses as long as it is healthy; and if it is large, then cut the lips of the wound, and cure the one who caused the pain.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	1. If the vein is opposed or another part is hurt, and you hurry and use the glass wool leather, leave it on for II to III hours, until the wound presses, and let the heat of the blood flow; then return to the copper as much as it needs to be.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	2. Look at the forms of the fistula engrowths, and there are three types: large, thin, and small; and they are called "alabarrettes" in three varieties: great, thin, and small, to encroach on the fistula openings; and they are also like the beaks of gulls, and are made of gold, silver, or copper, and those that are yellow are more expensive to encircle the beak holes of fistulas; and there are three varieties: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the larvae of the fistulas.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	1. The shapes of the claws are like mirrors, as you see: large, medium, and small; and if the claws that have two beaks of three kinds also; and if the claws that have three beaks, and are of three kinds; and if the claws that have two beaks, and are not claws, and are of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their legs.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	1. The heads of these are sharp, and such as cannot cut anything finer than one part, whereby the nose and throat are burned, because they do not touch the veins or nerves; and these introducers are returned to the hands, if the surgeon does not lose them in the incision of the abscess; and there are three kinds: large, small, and middle, as you see; and they should only be used in the legs, like arms, hands, fingers, and toes, and in similar places; and never made into another instrument, resembling the teeth of forceps, according to this form, unless it is to cut something finer than a lancet:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And he puts it on none of the times to the shoulder that is strong in bearing veins and arteries, and never returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never do the breasts of other men swell when they come to be corrupted, as they seem to be women's breasts; and they become lean and inflated, and those who see them cure them, if they come to be like this form in this line: .b. until .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then the fat is scorched, and the wound is treated with medicine that burns char, then sew the lips of the wound together as tightly as possible, and cure it as long as it is healthy; and if the breasts are curved, and become smooth because of their greatness, if they are made into the belly's corners, according to this form: .b. until .g.; then scorch the leather that is between the lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not see it repos, or for the decay of blood, if you fill the wound with cotton moistened with corrosive ointment; and leave it until the remitting and fat are gone, then cure it as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	The first sentence to translate is "des apostemes des asselles". The translation of
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The first sentence to translate is "Cist apostemes que viennent de l'os des asselles sont manières de scrofules dures ou il y a des cotes, et s'en i a que contiennent moistor". The translation of this sentence is: "These apostles that come from the bone of the horse are ways to form hard scabs or have points, and they are full of mo
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	The first sentence to translate is "Cil donques qui contiennent moistor covrent qu'ils soient couverts selon cette forme, de la ligne .b. jusc'a la ligne .g." The translation of this sentence is: "Those that contain moisture need to be covered according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first sentence to translate is "Et quant toute la bowe qui est en l'aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc'a l'autre jour, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d'oignement avenant a ceu tant qu'il soit sanez". The translation of this sentence is: "And when all the wound in the apostle is healed, if you use a piece of soft cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat the ointment as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scabs, then it is like we have said in our words of scabs, and if the wound bleeds a lot, then perform cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is torn, and the vessel is cut, if it happens repeatedly with abscesses, and also there is blood in the vein and abscess; and if the conoist on is when it is for the artery, if the abscess is long and painful; and when you feel your pain, if it is tight; and when it is for the vein, if it is cut loose; and it is madness to treat this abscess, and at the same time when it is loose the clamps and nails and other leus, and there are great mout.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries. Here is the translation of the first line: "It is necessary to avoid the cure of fire, and the one who is in charge must also avoid it, and in the one who is full of arteries made of thick skin; then cut the tail as onions, and remove the artery from the walls, as far as it is discovered; then take an awl, and make a hole on the other side, and draw the artery with a double thread according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then the bone that is between the two ends of an intromitor as long as it is not removed, and so release the grip of the wound; then apply the cure that follows as soon as the bones are healed; and if the wound is for the vein, then it comes that you have to hold the bone in your hand that you pulled out of the wound all over the body, then take the awl out of your hand and make a hole in the bone that you hold in your hand, and feel it, and if it has double threads, then draw it from the other side; then close the wound as I have said, or from one of the two parts of the two fils; and if you doubt that the threads are not inside, then take another awl at every thread of the whole wound from the first awl, and draw the threads in four holes; then close the wound as much as the excess does not leave, then close the excess and leave what is tied; then put a drapery made of silk in wine and oil, then close the wound with tents and ointments as soon as it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	The first sentence to translate is: "Ou cautere de feu comande au
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	1. And this happens more often with assistants and you must do it in all joints, and it is a great relief, and its color resembles the color of a dead man's face, and it is in many positions that cause pain; and when they are stretched, it feels like the patient's pain is increased, and not as much as in the chest, but rather in the belly; and it is completely silent in all parts, and does not move forward or backward, nor does it contract, and the one who is in joints cannot overcome it with force: by chance, it causes contraction; and those who are at the head or front, make the skin wet with sweat.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the head of the bone is small, and it is held with nails, and the cure is at its root; and if it is large, and it spends in the hip, and it is burned, then the bone and assembly the wound to the stitching, and the cure as long as it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	large bones hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never occurs in the belly and does not affect any other part of the body, and is a disease called "fungus" by its appearance, which resembles worms, and is located at the root subtle, and the head is large; and it has small and great fissures; and I saw one who had such that his belly was more like fungus than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and were infected, and became moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I found them and discovered in one there were eighteen ounces, and in the other six. The incisions should be made if you observe that the patient's hands are moist, and the color of the artel is bluish-gray and moist with a subtle root; if the cautery is applied with a wide spatula, and they are present, then perform the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in the cautery there are often too large dislocations of blood, and if you do not care, then if you hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient sweats and pains from the incision of fire, then take a piece of gut well made, and in the artel as we have said, and leave it there; and then restrain, and do not cease to draw the gut from the artel until it feels the pain, and work on it; and if the roots are large, then at once cut through the belly, but you must well cut through the middle, then cauterize so that it does not revive; then cure the wound, and keep the hole that is full of dark color and poor sense and watery lait.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are enchanted gums, and I will come to treat this sore hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boudoir is full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the appearance of the boudoir comes from a burn or cut wound, and it is in the abdomen and there are some feces, if it happens in other ways, or from sac which is cut from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from ventosity; and if it is by the rupture of the gum and the issue of the bowel, it is the color of the enchantment similar to the color of the flesh, it is a light thing with pain, and open to various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	When it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on both sides, if it returns, and by chance it is strangled, and enlarges the opening of the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when one presses on it with one's hand; if it is due to sand, then it opens by these signs, the wounds are large and hard, and are filled with a certain quantity; if it is due to ventosity, then it is damp at the point of pressure, and the appearance changes when one looks at whether it is the sand of the artery, or the vein, or ventosity.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you allow the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and the vein. Then you command the patient to touch the hair with their tongue, and stretch it all around, then suck out all the mucus; then command them to swallow the blood that comes from the wound, then take the other half of the abscess and wrap it in a strong cord or thread, and make sure it is tightly tied; then take the other half of the abscess and wrap it around the cord, and mark the end of the intestine, and if you feel the intestine, then tie it off and cut the intestine at the top of the stomach; if you feel the bowel, then tie it off and cut the bowel at the anus, and remove any excess; if the artery or vein is opposite or the wound, then go back to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads, and pull them out through the points where you think you are making the suture; then draw the suture through the four points of the needles, and if you see, then the needles, and leave the wound as it is until it heals by itself; or if it is subtle and oozes, then perform the cure for what you have to do, and close the suture as we have said; then remove the blood or mucus that you sucked out, then treat the wound as we have said; and take out the sanc or the mucus that you sucked out, then treat the wound as we have said.
dou chancre	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of the appearances of a gumma, and it is noted that one must oversee with medicines, and it is noted that one must use the iron cure; and we say that a gumma enjoys in the marriage, and great caution in its cure, and they say to the old man that when gums are in the mouth or can be removed if it is like the gums that are in the mammary glands, and in the cleft, and in the appearance of them, and it must be done all at once when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it only matters that you approach it, because I have never seen anyone healed; and no one has ever been healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here comes the translation:
de ydropisie	The first sentence to translate is "Or cautere de
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	The first sentence to translate is "Or cautere de feu comande au malaide qu'il laisse les poilz tant qu'ils soient lons et igals; et s'il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let us move to Section II.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And if the point is not entered more than it can come into the intestine when you feel it with your finger, and it cannot be pushed; then look to see if the prostate is engorged with regard to the intestines: if it comes that you need to cut it off at the third part of the bowel, then you must do so directly below the pubic bone; and if it is due to disease of the liver, then it should be cut out at the right side of the third part of the bowel; and if it is due to gallstones, then it should be cut out at the left side of the third part of the bowel; and only if the bladder is empty, then you must cut it off at the point where the superfluities do not flow into the weak one; then percuss all around the instrument, and the bougie, and gently place your hand on all the space between the skin and the faecal matter as you would when scraping a nickel or an ounce; then percuss the faecal matter until the space is filled with the skin, and this is the end of the operation. And then take out the instrument from either side. And the form of it is like this:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a silver dog, and is of tin or light silver, and in the part of the hollow it has a small puncture; and on one side, three punctures; and on another side, two, and one; and the head is cut so that it resembles a pen, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes make with the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the head of it is the wound, so that when it bleeds, now use the instrument; empty the first third or second part, for if you see more than it should in that hour, by chance it may die from the resolution of its spirit of the weapon, or it may lose consciousness, or approach death; but according to the quantity of its valor, and according to what the dispositions of its valor mean, and its courage; then take away the instrument and hold the wound, and it will be held now by the heat that stops the puncture that was seen in the sphincter, according to what I have spoken, that you perceive in this manner; then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take a small quantity of blood; do this every day, and keep it from bleeding as much as possible but a little blood.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	1. If you doubt the patient's condition, and they refuse treatment, then the cure for the wound or abscess may be burial in sand or soil, and through moistening or bathing and sun exposure, and cooling with drink; and the cure for drying medicines is when it is healthy, and cauterization on the stomach, liver, and spleen after the removal of the wound, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	2. of the end of the beard
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	3. No child is ever born without having a pustule in the beard, or if it is small, or if it is not full in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If the dislocation is so great that it cannot be perceived even with the most delicate touch according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the cloth on the affected part and tie it loosely for three or four hours or until urine is seen, if possible, close the cloth and collect urine, and then replace it; and by chance, if it does not hold, because the urine that comes out will loosen it.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the discomfort is slight, if it is treated with a thin piece of cloth as described, and if it improves.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the discomfort in their groin are lucky, because no one is born with discomfort at the tip of the penis, because they cannot urinate before they lift their penis up; and they cannot ejaculate because of this, because the material cannot come out due to tightness, and it is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The manner of the cauterization, if the patient is conscious and it burns on his back, is that it is like the tip of a sword and as large as a pen's tip, if it pierces the flesh; and keep away from the evacuation of blood that comes often, and if it comes, if the wound is that which has been pierced often, and cure the wound as much as possible.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times they come to the penis, and it looks like a bad appearance; and among them are malignant and non-malignant; if it comes that you purify them in the subcutaneous fat, and cut and grind all, then put on cotton wool with Egyptian ointment; then the care of the ointment is done as much as possible.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the boil is malignant, of dark color and painful, then you must undergo a fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	After you have removed it, and the boil is still present, and it has parts of hair and flesh, then you must remove the part that was originally covered; and if it is still present, then the cure is complete.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you remove it all at once, if you do not ensure that the head of the boil is not felt, and it becomes black and corroded in its head and around; then everything that is black and corrupt must be treated with honey and flour made from the scungy of garden mushrooms and vetches, then the cure for other boils as long as they are healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if the dislocation comes, then follow this form of the lunar cauterization:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if the cauterization helps in these two positions: it is to know, at the dislocation of the joint, and at the corruption; and if the head of the bone is corrupted and returns, if you find that you end or lead the bone with a cord, and piss the saliva among; and when the gums reach the chief of the bone which has not been circumcised, or has been caused by a wound or an abscess, then it comes to pass that you scarify it with the instrument scalpel, as long as the ligaments are slipped, and are delivered from the bone of all parts; and if this is difficult to do, then scarify the entire chief of the bone and the hair; then dip your hand in water, and put a fine wrap of cold linen on it, so that it does not get cut again.
de la circoncision	Of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a trivial matter like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will, and properly as for our children, it is the best work we can do, and the most gentle for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not call circumcision of their sons, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the largest part of the masters and doctors who performed circumcision in the old days, and had forces, and at every age; if it were not for the fact that he had two hands, and by chance if he could not perform this operation and another one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	1. If the bone heals, and there is double pain, and the circumcision is not securely fixed to the point of the member; and if the circumcision of the finger is by chance cut off, it causes bleeding, and many times are born without any means of circumcision, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	2. Of the circumcision made with force, I have found the benefit of the experiment, because the forces cut both sides equally well, whether up or down.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	3. When you press your hand, if it holds equally well on both sides; but that the thread is not too tight around the finger; and that the first circumcision is done in such a way that the child does not think that you are doing more than just tying the thread around the finger, and then tie it in all the ways you can think of; then tie it between your hands, and place the forces between your hands or on the side of the fingers that the children do not see, and then hold your hand on the finger and blow or suck until it is high enough that the thread is not assembled; then mundify well the dirt that is assembled, then tie the loop of a double thread, then tie the other loop to the first one; and you must do this by the second reading in the pouch and the index finger, and cross the loops, then gently pull down the corner of the hand and draw the tip of the finger; then leave the sand pit empty, because it is dirty; and put some powder on it and on the powdered glue made from a cooked kidney cut in small pieces, preserved with olive oil and fresh, and leave it suspended over the other jaw, and cure it further until it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the transformation is this: the two heads are thin and narrow, and are as large as the equal hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the transformation is when the corners escape through the incision; therefore, it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, unless the corner abscess faces; and it should be done properly, and if you do not hold it with your finger, then the corner.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass three years, and the corner is shrunken, if you let it be until the abscess is calmed, and gently burned, and if the corner is as you press it, and keep it from the part of the root, it will not hurt you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first line of the text translates to: "Treat the wound with something like powdered plaster, as we have said or handled in the past, and if it does not heal, it will become infected; treat the wound as we have advised, as long as it remains healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	The second line of the text translates to: "Hold back the urine.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The third line of the text translates to: "If the urine is from opilioation of the urethra, or of congealed blood, or of the bowels, or of the colon, or of similar things, which we have said in the division; and if the urine is dribbling, and you see the retention by the urethra which is at the anus or the lower part of the bladder, then it comes to pass that the malaide is caught on its roots; and they are placed on the back, and the abdomen is extended from the part below the back, and the malaide is restrained as much as it can; and therefore the collar of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the urethra at the end of dribbling, because the urine is dribbling; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the malaide feels great pain, then it comes to pass that you administer extraction from all the instrument called 'siringue', of which the form is: and it should be a fine silver thread hair, as the tail of a sparrow; and it should be the tail of a palm leaf about half a foot long, and it should be fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	The manner of the exit of urine is if you take a double thread and tie it at the tip of the linen or cotton, and cut the tip of the thread with the sewing needle; and cut off the excess of the linen and cut the tip of the thread, then anoint the thread with oil or wax and ointment of urine and urine of ox, and make the patient sit on the seat, and the vesicle and the verge moistened with olive oil and olive oil and German thyme; then gently put the thread in the verge as it reaches the root of the verge, then double the verge downwards towards the bougie; then cut the thread before the vesicle, and feel the patient come before the empty thing, and this is not a good way according to this order because the urine comes out because of the conduis or it will turn; then the thread is all through the linen pouch and pouch, and the urine follows the linen, then it is drawn out, and make the urine corre; and resume the thread as soon as the vesicle is empty and the patient is alleviated of the pain.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When there are itches or pains in the bladder, or when dysentery occurs and you see waters and medicines distilling, then do this to all the instrument called "cleansing", and it is shaped like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it pertus: II of one part, and I of another, as you see; and the water is drawn by the medicine being so hot that it stuns the verge with addition, if you can draw the moisture, and then close when you are done; and when you see your medicines guttering in the bladder, put the end of the candie-stick in the moisture, and draw the drawstring which is at it; if you draw the moisture from the stick, and then forcefully pull the drawstring again; if the moisture enters the vagina now, and comes to the bladder, if that makes the patient feel better: this is the form of the subtle clyster which is used to cleanse the bladder: if this is the case:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	1. It is of silver or archaut, and it is the head more up; and then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see thickening the bladder, then lay it between the two seins forming a double-layered pouch, and heat the moisture on the fire; then cut the clistere at the edge, then hold your hand on the bladder all the moisture coming out, as if the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and perforate it roundly; then pull the strong thread through these punctures, then assemble the circle like you assemble the dough, and put what you see as oil, moisture, and ague, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand as the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	From the incision
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the ways of incision, and the extraction of teeth; and we said the difference between the incision in hard tissues and those signs, and in what size we should over it; and in the vagina, and in the gums; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the incision which is more common in the vagina is in children, and this is a sign that the child's gum has leaped up in its subtlety; and it is open, and hits the gum of the child, and it can many times, and then swells; and then the child's wound heals; and it is light the cure of children up to 4 years old, and it is heavy in girls, at those who are between girls and women; and it is the cure more light for those who have large gums, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	When we come to treat the patient, we must first cover the surgeon's hands with a cloth and clean all the tools that are inside the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	Because it never needs to be reopened.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the legs, stand up and move them towards the pelvis, if the wound descends to the top of the vagina, and does not cause any pain; then place the patient between your hands, with your hands on the thighs, so that the vagina is completely bent downwards; then you can see and touch the wound in its place, if you want to cut it now at the wound.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If it does not respond to touching all, if your index finger indicates olive oil from the left hand, or if your nail is hard, or if your nail is well-groomed; then the bone in its foundation, and try to prick it, and when you feel with your finger, if the nail is at the corner of the vagina; then press with your finger, and the bone should be able to be seen.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the vagina with his hand, and he commands him to extend his right hand's fingers upwards, and his left hand to grasp the bone that is loose at the part where the cut is made; then he pierces the spatula copant, as follows:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	1. And they cut between the joints and the foundation, not too much but along the cost side of the opposite side; and there should be three on each side of the incision, and the tail should be long or at the foundation, and it should be wide enough to pass through if it is too large, and should be tightened according to the size of the incision, not too much; by chance, the pressure should be applied if it is at the foundation, so that it does not slip during work; and they should check if there is any part that is pieced or has angles and margins: if it is rough to exit; and if a part is connected, it resembles a glass, and curves, whose end is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	1. If the joint has angles and margins, make it larger; and if it does not slip, then draw it with the nails that are like a pin at the head, to tighten the wound so it does not come out; or use a subtle instrument at the head; and if you do not pull it, then enlarge the pore if it is blocked, and if it is not broken, then pull it with vitriol; and if there are more than one wound, then pull the largest one at the top of the bladder, then close it, then pull it further, and the smaller ones after.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is left large, it will become greater, and cause a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things can happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out due to the urethra not being able to close; but you must persist in your efforts, or in your mutilations, as long as you can manage to do it in pieces; and when you have completed your work, if you employ the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and draw it, and moisten it with oil and wine, or with oil and pink rosewater and cold rosewater, to soothe the fever blister; then close the patient's urethra at its base, and do not let any of the ligature slip from its place.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, if the joint is well oiled with oil and wine, then apply the poultice of bread and the poultice of basil, as long as it remains healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if pus comes into the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the vein, and this is retained in the urine, which is done in a similar way without voiding with the urine: cut through the plague in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will cause the vein to rupture and bleed; then raise the plague with oil, wine, and salt, and all other means you know, as long as it remains healthy; and ensure that all treatments you give, you tie the thighs together, and assemble all the medicines under the armpit.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the prick is small and it is led by the girdle, and it is checked often, and the urine cannot be discharged; if the cure I have described does not relieve this, then you must trim it many times for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already done this before.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	I will prepare according to this form and make it at a 3-angle cut, with 1 tie:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie it around the girdle outside the prick, so it does not come out of the vessel; then cut the thread on the girdle lightly, as it reaches the prick; and turn the thread back to your hand at the prick often and often, until you can feel the prick from the other side; if urine comes out, then press your hand on the part that is exposed by the prick on the girdle.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the fracture is such that it breaks with urine, and the bandage of the splint; and if you do not know how to do this for nothing, then cut off the end of the wound and the other side, then make a groove between the two wires, then extract it, and remove the linen, and cleanse the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat it as it becomes healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the woman's wound
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	If the wound is in a woman's genital area, and if there has never been one, then it is the cure's grief, and is defended by three things: one is that by chance the woman is virgin; and the second is that it is not possible to find a well-educated woman who has been defiled as before, even when she is cast.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	1. If a third method is found that involves chance, and it is not possible to find a skilled woman in this art of hands; and the fourth method is that the wound of the woman is more than the wound of the man, because she can make it look more realistic, and there is greater pain involved. And if it is necessary to remove it, then it is best to prescribe a gentle remedy at first, and later if it does not work, then use a subtle cast; and it presents a wise advice in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command in the inquisition of the wound; and look well if the woman is virgin: therefore it is necessary for her to submit her duty or foundation and seek the wound; and if she is pregnant, then she is constrained to submit her duty or foundation, and the midwife recommends that she submits her duty or gives birth, and wants and presses her left hand on the vesicle.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If the dislocation is severe, so that it moves great by little, from the entrance of the vagina up to the root of the thigh; then, cover the wound in the root of the thigh against the cold ground, and if it is not bleeding much, and feels painful, and the wound is in that part; and do not move the limb above the wound or below, and make the size as small as possible at first, then bind it with a cloth, if you feel the wound so severe that the cut becomes worse, and sew several incisions: it is to know, both small and large, sharp and smooth, long and crooked, and those that have rains.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you suspect any strange appearances to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you do not want to see any strange appearances, then put vitrol on the wound, and hold it for an hour until it is no longer inflamed; then return to your work, as long as the wound is healing, and use the splints I told you about in the extraction of the arrow to help you in your work; and if you do not want to see it, and it is the artery that is closed, then put powder on the wound and bandage it with cloths and bandages, and do not continue this, and leave the wound and do not touch it by chance, because it may kill the patient; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the pain of the wound is calmed, and you read it, if you return to your work, as long as the wound pierce is firm.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia cancer
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Colloid is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white suet, which contains the seed; and it is called "suet," and never properly in the lining of the seed, if one cares that it is another seed; and this is the skin between the white suet that we have mentioned; and there were no seams non.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this colloid is because of friction that comes from the seeds, and it is expanded that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	1. And never comes from percussion on the bones, and this moisture is of many colors: either it is declining jaundice, or without redness, or black, or white, and it becomes more; and these are the signs of this assembly, because if it is white as we said, then the abscess is open, and it does not cover the bones, because it is moist throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	2. And if it has moisture in its own cloth, then the abscess is open with a part of the dough, and because of this, they think it is another wound; and if the moisture is between the flesh of the bones and the white sack, then it feels well; therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, you should examine all the intromissary part before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows after the curettage, determine which is denser.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, if you want to cauterize with fire, determine whether the patient is healthy according to how the wound fills; then, with the cautery, make a cut on his back, on something of a height, and pull out some drapes from it; then, if it's his other side, command the assistant to sit facing forward, extend the finger at one of the two costals of the chest between the ribs as far as the point where the puncture is; then take the spatula, and scrape the skin of the ribs along the entire length until you reach the tip of the puncture, making sure to keep your hand perpendicular to the white hair, and scratch it gently so that it doesn't hurt; then make a small incision in the white hair at the large pit, extract all the white hair, and then put your fingers, and settle the white hair on top of it, without touching the ribs, but only the white hair itself; scrape the costal muscle gently, whether you do it well or piece by piece, if the white hair reappears on your hand when you're working on the ribs, then reinsert the white hair in its place as soon as you have completed the operation; then gather the two levators of the costals with the white hair at one end, and treat it like other wounds, as long as it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you suspect the male organ is suffering from another disease, and the suspensors of the penis are dislocated due to pain; then cut the suspensors at all levels, and remove the penis, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the wound is assembled in two parts, which are the branches; then cut the other part in the same manner as you did the first incision, then cleanse the sore with oil-roasted linen; and anoint it with wine and oil, and anoint around the suspensors, and double knots of cloth, and sew it to all the parts that are according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two threads, and use fine thread according to this appearance and they should be assembled by stitching in the groove of the braies, and some of them are pricked at the foundation on the back, and others at the part where the point is; and the other two are sewn at the two angles, and all assembled is the restriction in the braier's loop; and never has medicine been this way for the cautery of the tail of iron, and it is that you prick the subtle cautery cultellaire, and cut the leather of the coions, and so it is washed as we have said, if the white that contains the sweat is discovered; if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the white with teeth, and scorch it at this subtle cautere chaut:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	The patient should follow all methods you suggest, as long as they are effective; keep the forceps from touching the urethra; be careful that this operation is more beneficial; and make sure it does not cause dislocation of the joints, or increase their size; and if nothing else makes you do otherwise, such as an appendix or dislocation causing pain, treat it according to what has been said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is not certain about the instructions given, and there is a risk of perforation, as I have said, and you are sure that the malleable is in the right position, then make the malleable sit on the upper part of the fistula; then pierce the abscess at the end of the large part of the fistula, and make the perforation long enough to cover all the abrasion; then put cotton on the leu, and tie it, and leave the drainage of the abrasion to flow, then treat it as long as the wound is healing; if the blainche opens and allows the abrasion to flow out of the wound, then use a needle or the instrument used to treat the abrasion from the hydropiques, or form it as it is now; enlarge the wound, and make sure the abrasion returns, and assemble it after six months or when it is ready, and when it is assembled, it will pass the malleable's jors.
de l’aposteme des coions	The first sentence to translate is "de l’aposteme des coions". The translation is
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	The second sentence to translate is "Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme." The translation is: "I warn you that in the section of this ram, there are more dispositions for causing pain, and it seems to me that one should not leave it; and I will tell you the evacuation and the appearance of the aposteme.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	The third sentence to translate is "Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienne ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas." The translation is: "I say that the aposteme comes either by cutting or tearing, and it also happens to the limb
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know by the superfluous sour and sharp taste, which is spread through the mouth, or by percussion; and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the cor's cheek; and there is no pain, and it is an abscess that grieves; and sometimes there are grievous abscesses that are purple and livid, and of a funny color, and never comes from an artery or a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, if it is located by the arrangement of the abscess head, when you press on it with your two hands; and it is only necessary that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	1. That which is made from the vein graft is known by its disposition at the expression of touching both, and can well make the shape as this appearance, and as the others; and it is that you cope lou keur des coions, then it is the head in upper, and the trai is dou blanc syfac, and deliver lou suspensoire of all parts of the head.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	2. If the head is already swollen with these grafts, then it comes that you must move the head, and lou copes; and if it is aters au syfac, or in this who is made of denes the vessels, then it comes that you deliver all this tenve, and lou cope reondement.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birth of the child is from the lower part of the body, and you must deliver it all, and extract the head, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If your wounds are completed, then use the smooth linen oil and rose oil and wine for other treatments as needed until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the fingers
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	Cis is an abscess surrounded by a covering similar to a glove, with the softening of the fingers, and the patient suffers greatly when it becomes; and the treatment of this disease is well known as before, and we will tell you the wound of the patient according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	1. It is necessary that you put the patient on the operating table, then tie the suspender to the two handles at your two shoulders, and all the cords that are close to the edge, and mark the masters, and extend them; then cut a large slit with a spatula through all the veins as they are discovered, and then scrape from each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples; then tie a needle or if it has a double thread, and tie it to the first leather where the blood came from, and tie the other end to the other chief; then cut evenly, according to the length of the course, and in turn scrape the corrupted moistors; then cure the wound as we have done with the others, if no vein is found that bleeds, for all the veins come out, so you must cut the cords at all the veins; if the patient loses his luster through the incision of the veins and sews and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The signs when it is extension of the shoulder, if it is that there are few and far between, in long tenns, and does not suddenly come; and it is the painlessness until towards the parfont, because the shoulder presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when it is dislocation of the shoulder, that it causes sudden pain, and it is the apostemes diverse appearing, not from the skin but from the inside, and it is because of the exit of the intestine and the corse at the dislocation.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And no time does the circles descend with the intestine, and it is held in check, and causes great pain to the patient, even when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron for pain, because it cannot be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these treatments of iron for pain, because it cannot be avoided.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is this cauterized the white skin that we have said, after incision, due to fear of evacuation of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the line as it is for him; and if he lates at the wound, if it is warmed with hot water, and does what we have said until it stops bleeding, then cure the wound with another treatment, so that it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carcinoma
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this ramie, I have never seen anyone who has made the cure by fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like the ramie that is assembled with vis, in a similar way that you tie the veins, after lightly cutting them; then close it, and cure the abscess of that which operates, so that the veins cease; and the cure as we have said, so that it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	1. No time comes of burning wounds, as we have said, and open it; and no strings come from the intestines, and if they do, it's nothing, and repair all hours; and if it lasts too long in this point, it thinks the wound or syphilis, as the intestine strings; and this is by the extension of the gut which is angry, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and compressed the legs and open; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and no time is cured in this way: and it is that the patient groans on his back between your hands, then compress the leg of the burn that is swollen according to the quantity of III dois; and then extract the gut which is dry from the leather that follows, then take the rag and put it on the leg appearing dry gut sus lou chief dou rait, and press the two legs apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, and press the one and the other; then extract the chief dou rait, and do not compress dry gut nor extend the uterus nor any other thing, as we have told you in the cure of the wounds of the intestines; then the cure by the cure of the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, if the wound is cleansed and healed, as soon as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The scar is firm, and has no appearance of the fracture, and the cauterization is more effective at this distance, and further away from salutation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the thighs.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the thighs is softened, because the charms that are made are softened, and it can be seen; and it is a craft, when one sees it being healed, one makes the tailor cut the back of the malicious, and the curved skin that is softened on the natural skin; then assemble the lips at a seam, and if you see, first the superfluity of the softened leather at three seams or four firmly; then cut between the seams, and it heals as well as the others, when it is healthy, and the thread.
dou chastrement	The first sentence to translate is "dou chast
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	The first sentence to translate is "Saiches that chastening is forbidden in our law, and for this reason I do not mention it in this book; and there are no other ways: one of them is that the mirror responds when asked, and in the mirror the cure; and the other, because we often help some animals with chastening, such as goats and sheep, and rabbits and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that chastening is done according to these ways: either by attraction, or by burning.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the way that we do by attraction, we make our body the hottest animal, as long as it is softened and while; then take them with your hand, as soon as they are returned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	1. The treatment for the tailor's chastisement: it is necessary that you shave the beard, and press the leather of the boots onto your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each stitch at the heel as you go; and leave no rough edge or subtle one that is under the skin; and this method of chastisement is milder than that which is made by attraction, because attraction is weakened by chance, whereas the beard desires luxury; then cure the wound as much as it is able.
des hermofrodites	1. of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	1. Hermaphrodite is according to two ways as men: one is that when between the two thighs it is open as the figure of a woman, or if it has hair, and never once in cutting the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way, if it is in women, and they have had lovers before, they should be examined with a probe and forceps.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of the stomach and intestines if you examine all the displaced charts as other wounds; in the second way, men whose urine leaps out through the urethra, without treatment.
de la tentigene	from temptation
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Temptation is a displaced chart on the natural part, as it is too shameful to see; and no woman has had this so large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you trim the superfluity of temptation from your hand or nails, and gently press it; and do not cut too much, as it may cause pain, then treat the other wound as if it were healthy; and another one that happens in the mouth of a married woman, the emplace, and by chance it jumps, and is like the appearance of a kow, and for this it was called the ancient "kow's disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it comes to your mind that you copy it, as we have said the temptation, and cure as soon as it is healthy.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic if it is of the nature of the woman is not clear, or the pulse is small; and it is nature by birth, or accident by disease that came; or it is by childlessness, or subtle sickness or secret, and is made in front in the marriage, or in costez, or desoz, or whatsoever; and of childbirth, and by chance the flowers have; and the knowledge of this if by the regret of the wife.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	When the dislocation is noticed, it should be treated immediately, whether at home or at a hospital.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the pain is subtle and the wounds are close together, if you can reach them, and they should be cleaned: gather your tools, and the woman should lie on her back, spreading her legs; then the wounds should be formed, as long as the subtle pain persists and the dislocation does not occur, then take a linen cloth, moisten it in oil, and place it on the wound, and the woman should be massaged every hour until the pain subsides.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the pain is hard and persistent, then you should use a mustard plaster resembling a flax seed.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. If the patient is cold, if the strength has left the stomach and the chest; and if there are medicines to cleanse the wound, such as earth, fire, incense, and a large amount of urine; then make a poultice of this mixture, so that the wound does not become infected; and then wrap it in a dry linen cloth, and continue with other treatments until the patient is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the wound comes to charred flesh, if it is necessary to cut according to this method, do not use enchanted hooks.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the enchanted hook in the wound, it must not be touched with force.
des emorroides	1. "Des emorroides" translates to
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	1. "Emorroydes sont overtures de voines" translates to "Emorroydes are overgrowths of veins".
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that the hemorrhoids and the thighs, when they are in a state of inflammation in the marriage, and it is not apparent by touch, if not, it is the care of iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are in the mouth of the marriage, it can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then take the altelul with thorns, and cut off its roots, then powder some medicines restricting blood, as well as those of the dragon and incense, and similar things; then boil her feet in cold water for an hour, then put them in cold water; and if the pain comes when it is in a decoction of sumac and the extract of grapefruit, pomegranate, and similar things, and then take flour of oats, and mix with honey and ash, and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	If it is dislocated, it is bad.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If it does not dislocate, make the patient lie on his back and put his hand on his side without hurting; then take the other hand, and squeeze the joint with the juice of a plantain or an algafer wine with vinegar, and massage the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is healed, if you clean the wound as soon as it is healthy; and the one called "albathir" is red and looks like the first spicy herb I mentioned, and then you clean it as soon as it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	The first sentence to translate is: "Car en l’ovraige de cest chap
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	There are many types of ulcers that come about in the marsh, such as gangrene and herpes and boils and abscesses and fistulas and blisters and chancres, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, it is necessary that in this treatment, I deal with the chancroid that comes about in the marsh, which is not different from other ulcers; and if you see the wound, look to see whether the ulcer is at the beginning of its coming, and signs of fever and chill, and if it becomes red, you will see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	1. Therefore, do not despair of the splinter, but make him bear as much pain as possible; and then place the patient on the table, and let two assistants hold him down, and support his back and assemble his limbs as to adjust the leg; and let his fingers be spread out, and put his knees against his thighs, and fasten them well with a belt; then turn the bone towards the left side, and insert the instrument that opens the mouth of the mandible, and after that comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see the instrument being inserted, you fix the rail first to know the fitting of the mandible, so that what enters through the instrument does not fit more than it should, and does not damage the patient; and if the splinter is larger, then it is necessary to cover the fit of the mandible with cloths, so that the splinter does not hurt; and it is necessary to place the handle of the instrument at the end, and to mark the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the fist is opened and it is placed in the palm of the hand, if it clenches onto the head, at the elbow joint; and when the bow is seen, if it comes that you put in the wound soft tents in olive oil or vinegar oil; and place the tent for the wound at the end of the arm, and place it on the arm and on the nail that is clean coarse in water or soapy; then the care after two days of dressing as it becomes healthy; and never lift the wound and the arm by twine of wet and honey, and then with wet or roots of lis and aristolochic long are cooked; and then continue the treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	If the wound is dressed in the marra, then you must not cook with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Mastery is first in the dance that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see the woman pressing against the head, and desire to smell the scent of amber; then help the children to be born; then assure yourself that these children are according to the natural figure, and they are from your loins, and the second is with him; and when you see these signs, it is right to gently press on his belly so that the child is quickly; for when he descends from his head, if it is with the second one, and is the marriage of its superfluities by good washing; and this that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For there is no time when it comes to his bones, and it comes to the heart or head, and the hands, or to his stomach or intestines, and they are converted by chance or his collarbone, and by other harmful figures; if it is skilled in the dance that it is wise and subtle in these things, and warns of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures to help you.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child is born naturally, and the mother gives birth painlessly, and his virtues are weak, if he is placed on a stool or the women hold him, and he is cooked with oil or fenugreek, and then he dances between his two little spatulums, which is his form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	1. Then, cut the second one, and cut as much as the moisture allows; and insert the woman's belly as much as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to close the woman's abdominal muscles with ointment of mucilage of fenugreek; then apply and wrap with cloth, and hold the mouth and nose for an hour: if now the child is born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	2. And if the hands come out first, then it is necessary to gently bend them a little at a time; and if they do not enter, then the woman should sit on the bed, and lift the feet up; then lower the bed on the ground, and examine the woman to make sure she does not have any swelling; and if the hands do not enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the bend that is in front of you, and take the child out, and reset it gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child with its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes with its feet, if you can put it at the top; and then turn it a little by little until it is even; then pull the feet and extend them a little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can he jump high jumps, if commanded, and I make him jump from a height; if he jumps, let God be the witness.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he does not jump, if we have said so, and the turn is few and few, as long as it follows the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he does not jump when we have said so, and if it is lightly muscled with old oil, and waxed gum, and melted lead, and made to follow the nature of a woman's body and become stiff with this treatment, then I make it fit in the cold tube until the costals; and when it is softened at the costals, I make it the collar of iron, and put it on, and leave it an hour; then I make it sit on the seat, then I stretch and press his mouth and nose, and I open his belly slightly, because he now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	The issue of the child from its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if the mother holds its hands very little by little; then she places it on her collarbone, and lets its legs hang down, and then holds it tightly; and she folds her hands very little by little, and then puts her hands on its stomach, and presses its knees together as far as they can be pulled back; and if the child does not jump, if it grasps its feet and its toes form, then it pulls its belly forward, then it bites its hands; and the child is small and quiet; and commands the woman to pray as long as the child is like this.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the issue of the child who comes out wide with a hand during birth.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to bring the hand: if it cannot be brought, then lift the woman, and go; if she cannot go, then make her sit on the bed, and straighten the legs; then stretch the muscles that I have mentioned; and if there is no child, then make her sit on the seat, and study to bring the hand back; and when the child is born in its natural position, and it is strained, and it commands that it be pushed as much as the child can.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the issue of the child hanging by its neck, and its hands spread, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	1. It is necessary that the wound be cauterized with fire, then turned a little and often, and lightly; when it is healed, if it is greased with the oily nature of mussels and oil, as we have said, then it is commanded to move a little and often; when this is done, if it is made to rest on the cheek, and it is commanded to press; the wound is then closed.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	2. This method is used for all subsequent wounds.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	3. If the wound is covered with clothing, as long as moisture is present; and if the child can reach his face and neck, if the covering covers the bite, it must not be held, and the child will die; then cut off the bite, as soon as you have done so, and command the woman to press no more than once: therefore, if it is done gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is said that twins are born many times, and never at three or four; and this is a very strange thing, and has not been heard of.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are very strange, and have never been heard of living, with no name; I know that they are multiplied, and are produced by the same faculty that creates them, which is bound to the body; and they never issue naturally like all at once, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born gently, if the cure is as we have said, and it is the subtle dance, and acts swiftly and lightly as it should; and acts like it is worth its salt.
de plusors enfans	Of more children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IIII or VI or VII, or more than XV, and are all formed as a child by the measurement of the girl's age, and cover that the baby's growth covers everything, because by chance it resembles something; if you follow what comes.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	If you treat the woman of the dead child as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to cut with your hands; if it comes to pass that the woman is of sound constitution and has no accident or dies; if it comes to pass that the woman is crooked at her back, and her shoulders are inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the midwife applies the teigne of II parts, or she is laid in bed if she is not treated at the descent of the child; then grease the mouth of the mother with warm oils containing musk, amber, and fenugreek, and the lin seed, and grease the hands of the mother with these oils and these mustards; then blow in the mother's hands lightly, then take the leu or the bones that are flexible at this time, and put them in her mouth or in her neck or in her chin or in her beard or in her eyebrows or in her eyelashes, and when the child descends from its head, if the bones are placed in her arms, or in her collarbone, or in her mouth, or in her hair, or in her eyebrows, or in her eyelids, and the child is presented at the top of the head, and the bone is placed in her left hand, and she puts the cradle between her right hand's little fingers, and she bites it lightly with all her hands, and she does not place the bone in any of these places that we have said, as long as it returns to the empty state; and this is the form of the bone:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find the other bone, or the one you are most familiar with, if the extraction is equal; and then the joint should move evenly when moved from one side to another, by pressing, and the bones should be held with the teeth, as in this case:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part is broken, and one of its two oils is lacking, and the other is cut in that part, and the other part is taken; and if it is not broken, then place this bone or higher up, and do this until all is evened out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by extension, then wrap it around as in a drapery, until it is entirely; then the cloth in the joint of the plant or elbow, and it comes that you do with the other hand, and your feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	1. If the child's head is large and it comes out in the end, or if there is a swollen mouth assembled, then you should insert the sharp spatula between your two hands and cut the mouth and remove the swelling; or you will do it with the instrument called "almidach", which forms with the placenta or after this chapiter; and then make the child's skull naturally; and then take out the bones with needles, and the child's head jumps and is drawn by force, as much as the moisture that is or has come out; and if it cannot pass, then it will be cut in pieces according to what you use; and if it is enlarged in the belly or hangs loose from the ribs, then it must be perforated as much as the moisture corre.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is placed on its back, if it feels a gentle attraction, and the nipples are at the mouth of the breast.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if the child is placed in the stomach or belly, if it covers that you draw it up by draping around the hand; and when the stomach or belly, as long as the moisture that it has; and if another member is broken, and the head is drooping, then the mother can suckle from her breast, and the child takes; then she sucks the other breast, and the child feeds; and if the mouth of the breast is retreated because of the attack of gums that it has come, then there is no need to massage, unless it is necessary to administer moist and rough things; and the administration emplants, and it seeps in a soothing and moistening ointment.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If the child is on its chest, and you put it evenly, then do what we said in the living child; and if it cannot be done, then the part that is broken should be cut into pieces, and nothing of the second part should be left.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	After you have done this, if the child is misplaced as we said in the apostles' tongue that come into the marriage; and if the wounds come out, then if it is made acute by restricting, and the child is treated with other cures.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I see a woman in whose belly some children were once born dead, and then consulted another about it, and it was found to be death from the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time, some abscesses appeared in the flesh, and swelled as soon as they were pricked, and began to grow greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the cure, and I thought it would be long, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong adhesive with great attraction, and after a few days, more and more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was surprised, because the belly had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If you thought it was bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wished to heal the wound, and with my hands I pulled out the bones as much as I could; and the woman came later, and it was a little bit bowed in the shoulder; and I don't remember this chapter because when the master did an extraordinary thing, I thought I should help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the shoulder back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Then comes the form of the compress, which is placed on the wrists; and as the head turns, the joints turn as well.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Indeed, the corners should be more subtle and restrictive, and should be made of flat or curved wood; and the mouth should be no wider than the diameter of the thumb, and the margin of the branches should be no longer than a palm and a half, and no shorter than a quarter of a palm or a little more; and these two holes should be bored in the mouth of the shoulder to open when turning the corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, of a more subtle and lighter appearance, can be made of flat boards or sticks, according to the appearance of the nails; and it has two edges, as you see, like a palm of the hand, and they are wide; and when you open the marrow with all the instruments, if you place the woman's head on the bed, the legs and thighs, then adjust the tenails together in the marrow, and hold the instrument's handle steady between your fingers; then operate your hand on all the instruments, as you have done with the nails evenly, according to the quantity you see open the mouth of the marrow, until it fits as it was.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is used for every purpose and has many appearances; when it appears to the patient, the more hurriedly it is operated, and the higher the cost per quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument because you have not appeared to the patient, for their needs are not easily satisfied.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second child is retained in the womb, if you command the midwife to remove what the woman is holding, and then it is torn from the body, and her hands are forced to the mouth and nose; and if she jumps for this, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, then if I can, and make a poultice or compresses, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the miscarriage, such as mint, rose, anise, chamomile, calamus, and centaury; all these herbs, or none of them, are cooked or can be boiled over fire; then put a cloth or compress, and the other end in the mouth of the miscarriage, and hold it until the vapors come out of the mouth; then make it wet, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second sentence is not understood, then.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If the patient remains after this cure, and does not improve, then order the midwife to take her left hand in oil of mustard or musk, and then to push, and to want the second one; and when she finds it, press and stretch a little on both sides, so that the mouth does not resist during extraction; but it is necessary to move lightly to the right and left, and then pull; if it comes out and is healthy.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	The patient's mouth is dry and parched, so we recommend the remedy of sucking and fumigation with herbs; and if this does not relieve all that we have said, then you must follow our advice; but what is in the patient's mouth, tie it to the woman's navel, then cleanse it with a four-drug ointment; if it becomes raw and is replaced, and heals, then all will be well; but if it becomes rough and causes bad odor in the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary to use fumigations, then none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cress and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is such that it causes the woman to retain the flow and the second child if this is:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it seems like a cat, and it is placed subtly in the nature, and the large heads above the fire; and it is the fumigations from the charcoal, and the tanning as it is gnawed, and it returns another one.
de percier lou fondement	to break the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And many children are born who have not broken the foundation, but the child has swallowed something subtle and slippery: if it comes to the point that he perceals this slippery thing at his time, and does not perceal with a stone or a spatula, and gently takes the place of the ointment that it is not touched; then put on finely ground in wine and oil, and the cure of ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not remain, if you put or cut a nail in the toe, and leave it hands free, and be careful when you see the child coming to rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Neither does this cautery ever come out of a wound or abscess; if it comes, if you treat it, if as we have said, the toe nail.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula with great foundation.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodulation, and grow, as those that come from the ends of the second part, if there is one or more; and when this nodulation is old, it becomes active, and becomes rough or subtle in the blood or subcutaneous fat, and never are these fistulas permanent; they are known by the fact that they are caused by evacuation or ventosity when the patient evacuates, and by chance some fall.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	If there are fistulas that open into the bladder, and into half of the vagina; and they reach the junction of the thigh and the knee, and into the bone.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	If you want to know if the fistula is deep or superficial, and if it has any knots or turns, then use a thin wire of iron or silver in the fistula when it is not tortuous.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	If there are turns, then use a small tent or horse hair in the fistula as much as you can feel it with your thumb; and if you cannot feel it, and there is no egestion, wind, or water coming out, then as we have said: it is not perforated; if you hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	When the fistula is perceived in the bladder or led by the urine, if it jumps and cannot be soothed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perceived at the joint of the thigh, if it leads to the limb; if it has not tortuosity and the invention of pain, if it causes vomiting and there is no medicine to soothe by friction; and in these fistulas, there is no cure except labor and vanity of those who intermingle in them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not perceived and is ancient, there is hope for health through fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient's pain comes between your hands on his back; and he gently lies down on his legs until they are inclined to his belly; then cut a tent of rain, or a pillow if it has tortuosity, as long as you feel or the patient's tension comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	1. If the patient feels pain at the base, then it is likely that the joint is dislocated; and if you can discover or feel between your thumb and index finger, then it is suspected that the joint has dislocated; and you should check if it is properly aligned. If not, it cannot be treated.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	2. It is not possible to heal all wounds, but this is rare; and if you can help, then it is done as follows: if the fire cautery is subtle according to the size of the fistula, as said before; and the patient should be pulled through the fistula as soon as it starts to leave the base; and do this twice or three times, as you check that these charsets are straight, which resemble a penny's feather; then the dressing of soft cloths is applied, as long as the charsets are in place, then the ointment is applied, smeared on the charsets.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is in good health, so be it.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is not in good health, so be it. If the patient tries to force it, and cannot pierce it, and enters through the eye and into the brain, and sees a fistula formed at this point that covers the covering; if the cautery begins at the beginning of the fistula, and continues until the head of the tent, and then the cauterization is performed, as long as it remains at the end of the tent; then the tent will be delivered, and will remain; then the charred parts that seem like a feather's tip will disappear, and none will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	If it does not harm you, and cuts between you and the wound, whether by fire cauterization or medical boiling.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cauterization has two effects: it knows the surety of these burned things, and the stoppage of blood and the removal of moisture; then the care of soft tents embroidered in burr or in cloth braided, as long as they gutter down, and the char remains in the wound; then cure the plague of soaked things enjanned with dry char, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it is healthy and does not return often.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	If a fistula comes suddenly with great force, and it is moved away from the body, if the throat is hurt or not, investigate this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and if it is the skin or flesh, or charcoal, if it is only a sign of hope and expectation, by the administration of one of the three ways: if you cauterize as we have said, or if you cut it gently, or if you let it heal naturally and treat it as we have done; and do not move too much in front, so that you do not cut the tissue that holds the foundation, and wait for the discharge through the desired sense; then the cure, as we have said; by chance, if it is healthy, or you remove the covering and the mundane when it is healed from the foundation, or by tent or another instrument appointed; then mend the char that is in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and make the fistula longer in the part defended by the foundation: if it is still a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And no time are fistulas made in this way: and when you reach the end of the fistula, it is either costive or loose, if you take a tent according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I thrust it into the second, and thrust the tent all along the fistula as long as it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it persists in the edge of the loose flesh, then withdraw the thread from that pouch; and cut off the end of the thread, and assemble the two ends, and pull them apart, and leave one or both; and do not restrain it ever, as long as the threads hook onto those parts that are between two, and catch; then cure the wound as much as it is sore and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perceive, if you try to feel in all ways that you can, it should not be too difficult.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to make the plaster cover too much, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny thistle whose fistula is made if it is too long and narrow, and on the other hand, because one cannot cope with it or must not cope with it, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of emorroydes
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	There are emorroydes in two ways: either they are made from the foundation, like resin grains, and they become smaller and larger, and then they are cut into sauces, and they become one or more, and they are defuer the foundation and at its head; but those that are defuer have little moisture, and they are cut into a small amount of quinque citrine or a small amount of wine, and they have the color of corsage; and the cure for those who have made the foundation defuer is that you command the midwife to ooze in chambers as much as the foundations become firmer, and the children appear; if you hurry, and you can handle them with your fingers, or you keep them in your nails, then cut at their roots; and if the uncine cannot hold them by their moisture, then tie them to the fold, or to the cloth, or to a piece of camomile; and you pull out the children, then cut, and powder some hot powders that are in the cautery leu; or you cauterize as it is said in the cautery chapitre, and the other cures as much as it is healthy; and if the foundations cannot issue, then clisterize the midwife with a clister tooth and sharp, and wash what is at the foundation, so that it may issue openly; if the midwife's mouth is not preint, and the children are firmer at the foundation, then the lightest cure is; and if you preign them with your nails or fingers, and cut, then cure as we have said, and as much as it is healthy, and without fear of incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes that you want to sew according to this manner: take one thread, thread it through an eyelet, and then pull the thread tight and make sure the eyelet is on the other side, and turn the two ends of the other thread through the eyelet, and if it is too large; and then tighten the thread, then knot the eyelet, and do this to all the others, and leave the corner excess of the suture; then put the wet thread on oil or rosewater at the foundation, and put the foundation, and command the patient to lie down; and then let it alone until it is dry, and when it is dry, if the cure of ointment and other cures are needed, as long as it is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The first sentence to translate is "dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement." In English, this translates
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there have been dry feces in the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it comes to the point of a spatula or your nail scratching the wound, which does not allow it to get moist; then treat it as much as possible until it is soaked; and if it cannot be soaked, then repeat the scraping more forcefully than before, until it is clean and burned; then treat it as much as possible until it is healthy.
dou fremit	The first sentence to translate is "dou
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small appearance that should be cut from the chest, and it moves freely; and never does the knife touch it, and it feels like death to the chest, and it comes throughout the chest, and more hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that if you take a needle of a goose's throat, or a strong vulture's beak, and place it on the pulse, as long as the purple circle encircles the pulse entirely; then turn your hand around all the needle as you cover the entire pulse, and place it flat, and extract the pulse from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, if I make this of a goose's wing or of iron in this form, and is subtle and thin and well-cut:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not forget, but hold it with the other hand, and press. And if you see, if you cauterize the pulse, as it is in front or in the chapter of cauterization:
de la forme dou clistere	Of the form of the fire cautery
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never is it done that a silver or arch clistery, or an alloyed or polished one, is made; and never is it done that these are made of these strigils, according to which they are kept.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	For this reason, those that are used in the care of children and the weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the fire clistery is small and large if it is used wide, or the belly is lined in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if it has a dislocation or the belly is lined in this way: and the head of the shoulder is dislocated, and in the other the arm, and so on; and the belly or puts the medicines in a beast's vessel or a linen bag, and feels all around each pertus, and between each pertus there must be a spice, then tie it with the thread in the pertus as strong as possible, and gather the belly like a stomach; and when the medicine is given, if the head of the shoulder is at the end of a strong thread, then cauterize; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	1. And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or unguent of oak bark, or something similar, then lightly touch it; then the physician mixes his two hands together as much as possible, until it is all done, then remove the cloth, and gently lift the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine comes out, as much as it can; and if the patient sleeps a whole night, it will be more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. And if you dislocate the hip due to disease of the abdominal wall, and the physician's medicine comes out, if it recurs as soon as it is safe.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the swelling is or foundation, or gangrene, whether the clyster is also subtle and as fine as with a child; and this is the form of the subtle clyster that is drawn when the skin is stretched.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said the treatment of wounds in the division of wounds; and you will say the treatments of hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things made by wounds are made of the edge of the cut, and size and depth, or lance or spike or spear, or similar things; or they are made according to the places of the body, as a wound that is made at the neck, or at the shoulder, or the chest, or the stomach, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will mention simple wounds on the shoulder, because the reminder will come in his chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or the bone is not broken, if it is from cutting or similar things, and the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of hematoma chaut: if it becomes healthier of the head itself if there is little blood from the wound, and it should be healthier on the opposite part; and avoid the malady full of wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not become healthier, if the meat is anemic, and does not drink wine, and does not eat fat, and puts on the wound, it apostles with blood that is thin like oil or vinegar only; and if it does not apostle with blood, if it puts on the wound, it is fresh at all its sanc, and it is not moved by the air, dust, which I will say a little later; and if it has moved, if it puts on some ointments, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a spearhead and its surroundings, and the lips cannot be reassembled by tents, if they can be reassembled by stitching, like I will say for belly wounds, by sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone, it can be seen, and holds only by a piece of cloth; then cure the wound with medicine, restore it with leather in the skin, and order the patient to eat large meats, such as testes and cooked flour, as well as chicken, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you trueve or leather for food, and it does not reach the bone, then the whole porridge is lost, and becomes sour, then cure it; and if artere is in the wound or gut, which cannot be cut without causing pain, and it cannot be relieved by medicines, if one wants to cut the artery, and you trueve slowly, if the string is loose; and if this does not help, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	If these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you place in this powder which is always damp when the art has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take a part of incense; mix with three parts of dragon's blood; add three parts of live chalz, and the fine powder, and place it on the wound, and draw it out as much as it adheres to all its sanguineous parts; then close it well, and leave it to dry, so that it does not run or bleed, because the medicine is not effective until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And no time is made for a cauterization alone, when there is no candle or holy water from the dragon, but the surgeon has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the surgeon has moved the wound, then in this case, do not use any powder; but use some digested ointments or flour made from wheat and honey, until it bowes; then apply other cures as long as it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then use fine tweezers to remove it; and I will tell you more about this later in the case of deep wounds.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound of the shoulder
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	A wound comes from the shoulder and it is simple, unless there is a difference between the two, but if the shoulder is the affected part or the artery is compressed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the shoulder that is affected, and there is no other option but to leave the treatment alone and not restrict anything, as it causes pain and draws back; and do not put anything on the wound, as the substance of the nerves is cold, and continuation with the brain, which is the more sensitive member; but if the medicine is suitable, like calm water rinsed with oil rose, and cleansed again in calm water, and other herbs according to this method, and moistened ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, if it is bound with bandages, then the cure as soon as it becomes healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are sore and full of blood, if it is bound with bandages as low as possible; and if the artery is cut, and discharge of blood comes, if it is treated, and the gauze, and cauterization is done as best as one can; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the jaw, and it is guided, as soon as the meat moves, if the jaw is cut near the neck, and it is repositioned according to its natural figure; then the extraction is done, and it leaves some jaws, then the care of dressings is given as soon as it becomes healthy; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, if you want; and if it has pieces of bone, if they are cut as small as possible, and those that you do not want to have, leave them as much as the wound presses, and so that it is dry and alived the issue; and if the wound is fresh, if powder is put on the powder I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If it has an abscess in the wound and if it has been drained, then the treatment is as I have described in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of the arrow or of the nail
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from an arrow or nail, and the wound is gushing blood, then look at whether the wound is mortal; if it is, then treat it as a mortal wound. If it is not mortal, and it is fresh at all its sutures, then do not put anything in the first hour, but let the wound be open and observe the patient; but if there is any poison, apply an attractive ointment, and touch the wound twice a day. If you have no ointment, put cotton in the wound to dry out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three or four days, or more, until there is no spasm or trembling of the chest from the wound; if you see the bones in good position, then consider the wound saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat the wounds with remedies and other remedies, as long as they are healthy; and if they cannot be healed, perform operations with sharp tools that have been made; if the treatment is done correctly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is a cut or a stab with a sword or a knife, and it is simple, or on the back, if the treatment is done by the person in front; if it is large, use poultices; and if it is small, use powder; and if it is infected, and the pieces are taken out, if the patient wants to, and if they cannot be taken out, leave the wound open, and other wounds on other limbs are judged as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre". The translation is
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The first sentence to translate is "dou derrompement dou ventre". The translation is: "The dislocation of the stomach is great and deep, and often no intestines are injured; but there is usually an intestinal incision, and the abdomen is more swollen, and no small wound can be corrected as the large ones; for the intestines swell so much that they feel pain if they are put back in, and for this reason the moist plaies are most common, for the intestines are placed at the loins many times, and other wounds have fewer costures.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no damage to the intestines, and it is easy to fix, this is one of the two methods: either by the size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is twisted due to the blow.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is twisted, handle it in this way: soften an sponge or a damp cloth only, or wet it with hot water, add vinegar and salt, and gently pull on the intestine until it unwinds; never force it, and it will come out easily.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	When you see the inflammation departing, if the intestine of acute or chronic and malnourished animals is cooked, it is because this is beneficial for the entry of a pocket of something; and if it cannot enter, then a pocket is made in the wound with the instrument of coi, and the first cure is to cut off the size, which is not necessary in great necessity and should not be; and this is the estrumens for the fendre: if it cuts densely in the corbeure and does not defuer, and sees the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine jumps, if it is put back according to its natural form in its own proper leu, you will have done well, because this is beneficial.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower abdominal region, if you intend to raise the patient's shoulder on his back, and raise his legs higher than his chest; and if it is in the lower abdominal region, then raise the chest and thighs higher than the surrounding areas, and thus the wound will be in one of the two parts as agreed upon, depending on which part is higher; and it is necessary to manage this in large and messy wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wound is small, and it is in the lower abdominal region, if you intend to raise the patient's shoulder on his back, and raise his legs higher than his chest; and if it is in the lower abdominal region, then raise the chest and thighs higher than the surrounding areas, and thus the wound will be in one of the two parts as agreed upon, depending on which part is higher; and it is necessary to manage this in large and messy wounds.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I arrived at the intestine and it had been 24 hours since it was injured, and the wound was 15 years old, and it was treated, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the doctor looked at the wound that was dying, and it was a miracle; and I did not use any ointment because there were no medicines in my legs where none were found, nor any remedies; and I washed more than twice a day with vinegar on the wound, and as soon as it became healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or you will tell me the two most common methods of sewing: take the needle, and thread it through the part that is deformed at the end of the string; when it has perceived the right angle in the right way, if the eye or the tip or the place where you have threaded the needle, and make it pass through another part of the deformed part; and the results of this sewing are that you will do it as the tailor does with the hair, and you leave once the thread from one part, and take it back again, until the sewing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	1. The second method of sewing, which Galen calls his own, is the only one that anyone follows, which naturally assembles the two parts together, and applies one end of the thread to the other in this manner: take a needle or thread tail close by, and percify that one, and leave the other thread tail; then turn the needle, and percify through the part that is closest to the edge of the cloth, as the other thread tail; then percify the one and the other through the part that is closest to the edge of the cloth, in the other threads that are on the other side; and this is the best way of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens say this word, and no one testifies to it, we must sew the belly to the arrowheads, or they have a thread in each; and it must be one thread on one part, and the other on the other, in the manner of those that are cracked; and when the rupture is near the belly, if it is more painful than others in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	They judge the wound by whether it is like other wounds: and if you press the fresh wound with all its pain, unless the arse has moved, then reinsert the intestine and the bowels; then put some powdered charcoal on it, and if the arse has moved, then put any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is bloody; and cut the thread, and be sure to cut through the suture, and the mirrors; then cure the wound as you would with others, until it is healthy; and if you have no medicines, then use them, as long as they cause the bowels to grit, and mix it with vinegar, and stir it twice in the belly until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not have other medicine in addition to these wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not become infected as the main members, then it comes that you lightly oil with ointment of tamarind or rose oil, and put on bandages, and dress the wounds; and if there is pain or swelling in the belly, and often it happens, if the clysterize with red wine, and at the same time the swelling comes to the intestine; and the percussed, and sauces that when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "young" cannot heal until it is unwound, and this is due to the tightness of the veins that it contains, and the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the gouge jumps from the wound, and it is reset as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is large and turns black, and you see the black leu, which is not alive, because it has veins and arteries; then cut what is in the ligament, and put the heads down until the extraction is ready for the gouge to bow, and the wound to bend.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the bowels
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ruptured and the wound is small, if it can be restored with a few stitches, because I have seen that some were healed or the belly of a lance; and it was the wound on the left side of the stomach, and it was infected and became a fistula, and in it was the egestion and the vomiting; I treated according to what I could, and did not stop refining until it was healed, and I knew that it was healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it closed, I doubted that the patient had no harm in his belly; but he had none, but delayed in better dispositions, and drank and ate; and they told me no surgeons that when a small wound is made in the intestine, one must close it in this way: take large thumbs, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the thumb has overstretched the mouth, if you put it between the lips, if it draws the mouth back; then close the thumb, and hold it so that it cannot slip, and then make another thrust in the same way as before, until the wound is entirely closed. Then close the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	When the tip of the bowel is burned and causes no harm to the patient, and it can be tied with a thread as fine as a hair from an animal, in this manner: take the tip of this thread from the bowel that is cleansed, then tie it to the tip of the thread I of the lin thread, then pull the thread through the needle, and through the intestine, and then knot the thread at the rupture; and this way of stitching is not better than according to the course of life and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the large intestines, if it does not heal or become healthy, it should be done with great care.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	It is said that all wounds and abscesses, when they heal, if they are called universally "fistula", and moreover, if they are fine and straight.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the belief of the nodation that it must be hard and throbbing, if one feels pain, and is as fine as the tail of an ostrich; and never in a clear leap, and sometimes more; never thin, and sometimes thick; never short, and sometimes long; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not cured, and does not hurt, is only due to one of the eight causes: it is to know, by the slight pain or corse; or by malice; or because the pain is too deep, and touches the lips, which does not leave pain; or there are too many boils; or the lesion is porous, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or because the property in the region is slow digestion, and slow health, and runs by nature; or there are wounds or holes: and I have shown all these causes and their signs and remedies with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	The first sentence to translate is: "Or covaint que je te faie a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par ouvre de main.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	1. When fistulas appear in all the limbs of the body; for they have fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the small intestine, or the large intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine's sharp end, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if a part of this principal limb is affected, and they resemble these.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	1. And all fistulas of this sort are painful to heal, and only labor and ignorance can cure them; and if there is no fistula that does not come from the part I have said, and you trust in the cure, and see it work, then take a tent of iron or steel, and if the fistula is straight, as you wish; and if it is crooked, then seek a subtle tent of plait, for the plaits will twist with the crookedness; and if the fistula is in the hands and you cannot find it by tents, then take a pertus that has been closed by another, and clean it, and then you will know whether it is bone or nerve, and ask the patient to tell you of the pain he feels when you press his hand, and the leu where he feels it; and when you really know the leu and how far it is from the joint, or the nerve, or the artery, or the vein, or any of the parts I have mentioned, if the cure according to what I have said, and the wrong part that is corrupted; and then the cure, when it is sound, and the fistula is well made in its right place, if you can copy it as you press, as you please, then take soft tentes in medicine ague, and blow them into the mouth of the fistula, until the medicine corrupts the superfluity that has been drawn out; and then take sweet ointments in clean vessels, as they are healthy; and if it is not healthy, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, if the cure.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	1. If the limb does not hurt or the joint is stiff, as we have said; and if the bone is discovered, and it becomes blackened and putrid, as long as the putridity remains, then the treatment of strange things is done according to what is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and the wound becomes worse, as before, seek advice from a surgeon who knows how to do it: if the bone is discovered and it pains as much as it can be, and all the putridity is removed, then restore the joint; and if it becomes healthy, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	1. If the putridity is too much, seek advice from a surgeon who knows how to do it: if there is no other engine than cold salve in nature; and if it has small putrid bones, and you draw them out with needles, if the instrument is adjustable for this, and if there are more bones, do not leave any behind; and if moisture makes contrary effects, and there is neither error nor pain, then combine moisture and fire, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	1. If you do not treat the wound within an hour, then place a poultice made of something moistening on the wound and leave it until the pus is drained from the bones; and if these are large bones, such as those in the leg or thigh, then only allow the corruption to spread so that the blackness does not extend throughout the bone, then restore the wound; and if a large part of the bone becomes corrupted and comes out of the bone, then it is necessary to cover all the corruption with something that covers it, and then cure it as much as possible; and I will tell you about a fistula that came to your leg, so that you can use it as an example and help in your practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The text describes the case of a young man who had a pain in his leg for a certain number of years, which was caused by congestion in his chest. The matter came to his leg, and he fled from a large abscess, but he did not have any reason to open it. However, the pus overran so much that the abscess burst, and matter corrupted the matter, becoming a fistula, and he had peritonitis with wind and moisture in the chest; and many times he was treated for two years, and he did not learn any skill in the art of hands, as I am called, and I saw his leg and the medicines that were given to him, and what was corrupted by the peritonitis in the chest; and his chest became red with the juvenility of his youth, and he had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I made a tent in one of these holes, and then checked all the holes, and found that some came together at the end of all the parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I was determined, and I drilled into one of the holes until I found a part of the bone, and I discovered it to be corrupted and perished; I was the one who appeared to be of the corrupt bone, and I took care that it had no other corruption, as far as I could; then I began to heal the wound with medicinal salves for a long time, and could not suture; then I came out, and found the bone in the same way, and discovered the corruption continued in the bone, and I treated it, and then I put it back, and made myself suffer from the joint; but I could only drill into one piece of bone, and it was all over its surface, then I healed it with medicines; and it was healthy and cured, and did not want to re-open the wound for fear of the pain that the patient could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For because of the evacuation of blood it often happens, but it was completely cured, and there remained in the bone a hard char, and it was well disposed and had no harm at all, neither to the air nor to come out.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in no part of the skull, then it should be done in this way: take the strings, and draw the upper end of the string to the opening of the bone, and command that it does not extend above; and take another string larger than the first one, and lay it on the hard char which is out of the bone, and tie it at the head of the char which is out of the bone, and make the char turn as you see it should be turned, so that the hard char does not break; and put a bandage or a table on the bone to cover the hard char; and it shall be done as much as can be seen and felt, and done again as often as possible.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the bone is rotten and does not open, and the rot is in a large or small part, if you manage to cut through it all; then remove the affected tissue, and then separate one part from another of the rot, and the longer the rot is from the bone, the better; as we have said. And if the rot is in the joint, and the joint is rotten, and the bone or it contains another part; and if the rot is in the continuation of other joints, and there is no other angle than one corner; and if the rot is on the hand or foot, and it is very hard, but it is necessary that you investigate this corrosion as it opens; and it will be milled in all the ways you wish, but the bone or flesh will not oppose it; and you should know that the cut and the sews for the bones are many, according to the seat of the bones and the appearance of the knuckles, and their size and subtlety, and their growth and shrinkage, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to adapt each appearance of the instrument to your will; and you should know that the work will show you the instrument you have chosen, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; if you find the instrument you have chosen does not fit.
dou feu	The first line of the text translates
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The first line of the text translates to: "The patient's wounds may become infected or due to infection; and when you have medicine to treat the infection, it does not help if the member becomes corrupted up to the knee or the corrosion comes, if the malady is greater, due to the death or malice, which is more grave, of the member; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, if it seems that it is burning of the member, and turns after turning, so that the corruption spreads from member to member, and takes hold of all the body; if you have difficulty coping, and it is due to the collision of some venomous beasts, such as scorpion of the sea and viper and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the member, if the cope, and not the medicine comes easily to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	When it comes to the hand, if it's near the joint, and the corrosion doesn't reach the arm; and if it's on the arm, if the corrosion is at the elbow; and if it passes through the elbow, it's death, and there's no way to prevent it except for the amount of virtue in the person; and then do as follows: if the corrosion comes or goes: if it comes first at the first joint, and the corrosion after the other joint; and if it goes at the knee, if the corrosion is at the knee joint; and if it goes up the leg, if there's no other way than to kill the patient with a dose of opium; and how the copper or silk wraps around the member, if it's that the patient ties it and stretches one end of one of the laces, and the other end of the other lace beyond, and then sews the char that is between the two laces wide, as long as the bone is exposed; then the copper or silk, and wrap each part with a fold of linen, so that it doesn't touch the healthy part, and goes to the patient another wound and apoplexy chaus.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	1. If the joint becomes dislocated, when you perform the cauterization, or if you apply any restraining powders; then return to your medicine as soon as it is completed, then tie the wounded member with a bandage and treat it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to me in my youth: I found a black spot that seemed to be on fire, and this corrosion came first in his right foot, completely covering it; when he felt the corrosion, if he managed to cover the foot, it became healthy; and later, after the corrosion returned to his hand, it came to me, and I put certain things on it after embalming the corpse, and could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I cut his hand, but I did not have hope of curing the matter; and I doubted that if I cut my hand, he would die because the strength of his hand was weak; and he desperately returned to his land, and covered his hand with something, and it became healthy; and I did not know that for this other part, if one has the skill, one can do it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	1. No time comes with an abscess in the knee, and it takes a long time for a great assembly of bows to gather; then they pierce and cut, and in a leap, the bows are as soft as silk, and unlike others, the skin that is covered is as delicate as lace, and does not touch the bone, nor the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy" but is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone in front, it is called "fistula"; and the skin if it touches the entire covering, and at the same time when it is soft, like silk; and it does not rot for corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	1. If the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture and cannot stay in place, it must first be reset.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the belly is in its place, do not forcefully bind it; and if you do not cover the skin of the abdomen as you see fit, but appears in such a way that the belly moves down towards the lowest part where it is, since when the belly is in its place, do not forcefully bind it and do not cover the skin of the abdomen as you see fit, but appears in such a way that the belly moves gently along, and does not touch anything of the belly; and take consolidating medicines to support the patient's health, and they are placed on the draped cloth that covers the entire patient; then cover it with strong force at the point where the umbilicus is the largest, because the draped cloth is soaked in the quantity of the umbilicus, and it is placed over the umbilicus of the healthy part according to the amount of the umbilicus, and it is placed over the umbilicus of the healthy part to align the belly, and do not leave the large draped cloth until once; and the person who is at the umbilicus of the sick part often presses the belly, and looks at what comes from the belly, whether it is poison or little or much, or digested or indigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and if it has gangrene or not, and when your medicine has extended itself and you see the nature that jumps out of the umbilicus of the healthy part, if you look at whether the nipples have already changed, and approach the wound; then leave the morning or the evening, and when you dress the wound, if it changes the other draped cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	If the breasts become wet and indigestible after a year, it is suspected that the breasts do not fit well.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	If the venom subsides after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, because your health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	Because the venom subsides after a long time, if you do not despair of your health, because your health is approaching. And if breasts become wet and indigestible after a year, it is suspected that the breasts do not fit well. And if bowels are indigestible and sour after a year, it is suspected that the breasts do not fit well. And if the breasts are slow to heal and are affected by poisonous substances, and it is not certain whether they are cured or not, because they are made of vitrol and are the main remedy; then take a definite ointment made with rose oil, and add white vinegar in a small amount; then apply the ointment and use it; and the same mixture is made into honey that is cooked larger, when the ointment is not present, or you take a razor and shave and scent, and the powder, and the aristolochum and the celestial roots, which is also like flour and centaury; and use it as simple or compounded: grind it, and make a powder, and mix with the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the cure is long and not cured by this cure, then you should know that the corruption is in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the limbs; if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the toe
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Gangrene is an abscess that arises from the toe, either of the thumb or little finger, or by chance in other parts; and when it becomes inflamed, if it is not attended to, it may cause the abscess to suppurate, and burrow and gutter as it reaches the root of the toe, and may even reach the bone, causing great pain, and the head of the toe becomes large, and the color turns black.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut away all the excess that has been removed from the toe, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The fire cautery is a great help when the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the skin, and it begins to prick, and burn, then you should remove the tip of the nail that points at the skin, and cut it off, and take out the top, and gently and lightly touch the remaining part of the nail with the remnants of the hot and corrosive medicines to heal all wounds; then the treatment of wounds when they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, and it comes out, because as much as the bone corrupts and is, so it cannot be healed; and if you see the other corroding, and if you cut it in the way said before, then treat it when it is healthy; and if it is hard, and cut off, and it feels great pain, then it must be treated as soon as possible; and if it is very hard, and cut the nail that is sharp and hard when cutting across, and make sure that the tip does not enter the skin, because the patient will feel too much pain; and if it happens, then put something on that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the elbow
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The elbow dislocations that happen to some men by chance are quite common, and they often occur in the wrist, and never in the finger, and no one is born with this kind of joint, or it does not happen in any of us.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who dislocate their elbows without pain, and those who dislocate at the elbow joint, sometimes become painful; the size of the one who is dislocated is lighter, in a similar way: size it from the root of a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who dislocate at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you have pain in your hand.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the event that one needs to be opened from the rear, if it is possible to cover the wound initially with a clean cloth, then cover the wound with a suitable cloth, and treat it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The causes that come to us are either born, or caused by wounds, or caused by burns, or by other things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If the wound covers the cloth, if it needs to be repaired according to its natural forms; then put between two sheets or oiled cloths that do not stick, or put between two pieces of soft plaster as long as it is wounded, as it comes out.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If anyone comes to either of his hands with their finger, if they find that soft part, then it is correct.
des vils	of wounds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	There are large wounds that are full of melancholic superfluity, which come to more and more members of the lower body; and more come in the legs of those who go to prayer and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, it is necessary that you do not give any purge of colic and then the right of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is done in two ways: one is on the wounds, and the other way is to draw out the black blood; and the other way is if you let the vein flow, and take all of it.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	1. The length is according to this manner: first, heat the sharp leg of the thigh as much as possible, until it becomes subtle, then tightly hold the leg by the thigh bone near the part of the groin; then cut the vein either in I, II, or III, with a large size, then lift and trim the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much as possible without causing too much pain for the patient's strength; and then lie down, commanding it to become dark meat turning black; and resume evacuation and cleaning when the veins are relieved, and use it for the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first sentence in the text is: "Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the viscus is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not properly straightened, as we have said, if you must cut it tortuously but not through, and the cord if you have before told us.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron with which the vein is cut if it is twisted, and does not cut through, but only the cord; and it is a large corer, for if it were too fine, it would cut the vein, but if it is large as we have said, then it is this form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it may be found elsewhere than in the legs, and this is due to the excrement that comes from the hide, as it does from the serpent's core and towards, enjanree between the hide and the char.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	When the signs of the beginning of this vein are seen if it comes in the leg a very large inflammation, then it changes color, and begins to bleed, as if it were a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound is open, if it is necessary to cover it with a piece of cloth from one and a half inches to two and a half inches wide, and the edge, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not closed, if the cloth covers the wound, and the edge; and if it is too long, if a part is cut off, and the remaining part is covered with the cloth, and does not cover its root, until it is all out; for if you cover it, it goes back into the body, and brings forth pus and blood or leu, and great disease; for this thing it is necessary that it be treated often and often, and nothing or no harm remains, and there is no time for this wound when it is treated with V paumes of long, or X, and some hands came to me, and it was X paumes long, and when you cover it, if blood or pus comes out, and the wound is perforated, so that all is out; and the matter that is densified, and applied to the leu with unjaundiced medicines porriture, no matter how much, then the cure is done as the apostemes.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And no time the hands are wet, and at the same time when it opens in the joint, whether the knee or the ankle, and a drop of blood comes out, and if it falls; cure the patient as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of those that are born between leather and skin.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our country "beef disease," because it often occurs in many cows, and is a small worm that passes between leather and skin, and goes up and down the entire body, and causes pain at every joint of the limb, as soon as it reaches the skin or rash, and jumps; and is caused by the excretion of some humors, such as snakes, worms, and scabies or belly; and one doubts its maliciousness, because when it goes up the body, it goes to the head, and enters the oil, by chance returns, and destroys the oil; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the wound healing and drying, if it cannot be otherwise that when it will: if it comes to pass that you read the leg of the limb and its neighbor well closed, then close it and sew it, and it will stay in place, if the cauterization by fire is done as it should, until it is dead; and the greatest harm it can do, if it comes to pass that it touches the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming towards the oil, if it is drawn away from it the corners of the lip will form, then close it and sew it; and it must use the cauterant with mundification of drug solutions for the human humors, and beware of animal fats as food.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from wind
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "wandering" pain, and is a pain that comes in various parts of the body, and spreads from one part to another; and I see what I have told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called a female patient, and I saw my arm, and I saw a small flesh in the vein of the shoulder; and after a little while, I saw it rise as if it were a wire from the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as if silver were being cut from one part to another; the pain left that shoulder and moved to the shoulder, and then it spread throughout the body, so that it came to the other arm; then she told me that she dislocated, just like I see.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I am surprised to see how it moves from limb to limb, as I have never wanted this disease to happen in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I wished that people would not want to move the pain from one part of the body to another, but I do not want it, as I see in women; and I thought that this was because the woman had dry breasts, and the veins were discovered, and because there appeared that constraint; and I did not know until now that this is because of those who are delicate, and have moist breasts and veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	When you see the patient being cured of this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, if the limbs and toes are flexible, and then hold it as long as the constraint forces the leg to stay; and cauterize the leg; and if you do not see with your eyes the limbs, if the cure of this which relieves the constraint of the limbs, if like pills of herbs, and pills of hemp, and similar things.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the corps they enter.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of wounds is when there are those with large points, and small, and hairy, and sweaty; and those with sharp angles, and narrow ones, and those with long ones, and those with pieces; and one that goes into any member in different ways: or in the principal member, such as hair in the head, chest, liver, spleen, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	If the wound is in any of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you later appears, then you know that it is better to leave the extraction of this arrow than to die in many other ways; and if the sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not in front, then cut it out and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	1. When the sign of a fractured bone is seen when the limb is dislocated and pierces the bone, and the head of the cervical vertebra is forced into the eye socket, it is due to scotomie and sode, esvertin, and roujor of the eyelids, and inflammation and roujor of the tongue, and spasme and permixtion of understanding, and vomits of the throat; and by chance it may be due to nostrils or ears; and by chance it may affect the speech and voice; and a sudden jump of the white, moist wound-like incision resembles snares; and if you see this sign, if you seek treatment, and remove the arrow if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the shoulder when it is tense or painful is that it hurts or feels stiff near the left breast, and it seems as if it is becoming hard; by chance the shoulder also becomes cold, and there comes a chill and shivering, and shakes: then one begins to doubt that the patient is dying.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arm that is swollen is that there are no signs of scars on the wound, and the throat is swollen, and the face turns pale, and it sighs loudly and cries with pain in the heart.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the shoulder is dislocated in the covering of the chest, it is a great cause for concern and great pain and suffocation; and all the members of the arm are moved.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the shoulder is dislocated in the stomach or intestines by chance, it is a fortunate thing that no food is affected;
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the shoulder is dislocated in the belly or intestines by chance, and it does not hope for the cure, nor the extraction of the arrow;
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the shoulder is dislocated in the bladder or urine by chance, and it comes out suddenly with pain and the patient feels great pain: fatal wounds are suspected.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, if the face, neck, shoulder, spine, helper arm, and spinal column are involved, is not considered as severe as before.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the artery is in the bone or the wound, and it is not pulsating, as I will tell you if I remember, because you are doing this.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I have heard of one case where the artery was cut or severed at the root of the nose: I tried to repair it, and the grease from the ear helped to save it.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I have seen a case where the artery was cut in the grease of the oil of the paper, and the wound was closed, and it did not reach the end of the finger, and it was as large as a Turkish bow, all without making the finger heavy with ears; the joint was saved, and there were no accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And there was a gash in the throat of a man, and it was the Arabian scar on the ears: I was the beard, and subtle as I passed, and it was safe for the crests.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And there was a gash in the man's belly, which I thought was fatal; and then after XXX years, if it did not change its position, I opened the gash, sutured it, and reset it, and there were no further complications.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if a man has a gash in the back or belly, and it is the wound that was sutured; and the gash did not heal quickly, and did not change its natural dispositions, and did not find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man, who struck a thorn in his face, and felt the wound; and it took a long time to suffer great pain; and of other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And found a thorn in the shoe of the king, who had it stuck in his sole and was slightly deformed on the right side; and the thorn was completely embedded after three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound to be very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried to remove it with all my subtlety, and I did not feel anything; but I felt a sharp and painful sensation in my right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow I placed my hand on the affected limb, because I didn't feel any pain; but I realized it was from the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice to my hand, and the right side of the wound was relieved, and it delayed the patient's pain for a long time, until he felt the arrow in his shoulder; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied the poultice to the wound with my hands, and as it was overturned, I pulled it out, and felt the head of the arrow in my shoulder; then I added more medicine to the wound through that arrow, until the patient's pain became visible; and it took about four months to heal, and then I removed the nails, and the skin from both sides, and could not; therefore I continued to refine and invent ways to strengthen, as soon as I had well-made nails, according to how the form will come in this chapter, as soon as I treat the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the patient thinks that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it therefore, and it was sutured to the wound, and the patient became healthy entirely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have said the quality of extracting some arrows, if you put your cure on what I do not tell you, because the books cannot make everything look beautiful; but the masters of the things most important and present, use nine different operations and nine instruments, in descending the things that are drawn out in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows do not come from the limbs or they are false if according to two ways: either by the leg or they enter, or otherwise; and the one that is thrown by the hand or it enters, is an arrow that has entered into the flesh, and it will never be thrown again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does not jump now, if she leaves it until the hair is completely dry and the skin is pale, and then she lies down in the bone, and she cannot get up if she does not have any strength left, and no movement at all, and then she jumps, and if she does not jump, if she perceives clearly at any point, as long as the skin is pale, and then she will be weak.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the bone, and it will go to one of the stomachs, and any of the accidents I have mentioned to the helper: if he does not remove it, but leaves it as long as it is even after some time, because if the arrowhead goes to one of the stomachs, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	When the dislocation is only in the bone and does not cause facial pain, and there are no other unusual occurrences, it is not a serious matter for the surgeon.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation worsens and cannot be fixed, then immediately call for help; as I have said, and then treat the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the dislocation cannot be seen in the limb, and you want to try everything; and if you feel it, if there is no instrument that can be used for reduction; and if you do not have any pain or swelling, but the joint is very large; then reduce the joint as much as the wound allows, and if the joint has ears that hold it, then apply pressure on the ears of the joint with your hand, and then break or squeeze the ears of the joint as much as you can, and carefully, even though you may have broken the joint, continue to treat it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you do not once, if the bone is still alive and wet, then cut it, for the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the dislocation does not move in the direction of the bone, then it is against what we have said in this chapter; and you should make an incision on the nerve and vein, and insert a thread as you think you can most easily draw out the arrow, whether it is sharp, or blunt, or closed, or open; and place the needle according to the form of the hole that the arrow made, for this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you do not, if you do not, then follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The first line of the text translates to: "The arrow that comes from another part, or it opens no thing of him, or his skin is wrinkled in some place so that one can see or feel it: then take it out, as much as the nails can hold, and then pull it out: if it hurts now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, if you turn your round hand around as much as it enters the bone, and widens the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be pulled out, if you leave it alone, and then resume the extraction as much as it can be pulled out; and if it is a sore, and you see that it is bleeding, if the instrument points to the hair of the instrument, and then pull it out, and if the sore is hair, and the instrument point enters it, for lighter extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrowhead is fully inserted, then you should cut through the entire shaft or remove it as soon as possible, and then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the arrowhead is stuck in the chest, abdomen, or intestines, and it has protruded, then you should quickly cover it with a piece of cloth, and then remove it along with the nerve and the wound. Then treat the wound as needed, and keep treating until it heals completely.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tines used to remove arrows is similar to the beak of an owl, and it looks like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they are of different ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form of the pointed hair is like that of a squirrel's tail, with the point at the tip of the arrowhead, as shown here.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tines to insert and remove is like this.
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins that are safe to cut, of which sixteen are the ones behind the ears, called the "herbaceous" arteries; and the two arteries in the temples; and the veins in the nostrils, called the "aspirers"; and the vein in the forehead; and the vein at the root of the nose; and the glands that are underneath; and the veins in the lips of the mouth, also called "augeherich" veins; and the veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The first sentence to translate is: "Les voinnes dont on saine communément sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composté de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The saved vein is the one located between the ear and the anus, and if it rains; and in the leg, there are three veins: one that is located on the side of the cheek, opposite the nasal bone; the second one, called "sneeze," which is located at the ankle of the other cheek; and in the other leg, there are three veins similar to these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The salvation of the veins located after the ears helps old catheterization and emigration; and the quality of the sainie, as I said, is that you raise the patient's cheek and rub the leg or the veins are made of a rough cloth; then the patient's cheek sticks to the vis, until the veins open under the ears in the dependent dependence of the cheek: then give the lancet, and cut through the vein bone, then gently hold all the veins with your hand, and cover and the cloth and the vein well, so that the sane goes as you see; then rest and lie down, until it is dry; then I have already said the incision and the cautery of the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The head of the second arteries that are in the temples, if it is old, decayed, and accustomed to it, and has the waters of tears as hairs; and one qualifies it as better if it is as I say: and it is that the midwife draws her collar tightly when the veins open widely; and it feels the warmth of your thumb, and then swells; then lift the key on top of your index finger, and cut the lancet, and lift the vein on top of your index finger, and the wound, as you have done in the other veins, and make a deep cut according to your need; then release the midwife, and put your index finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton; and then form the wound, and leave it as long as it is healed; and we have spoken and of its healing and extraction, or beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The patient with the vein on the forehead is as sick as the one with the cranial headache, with migraines and bruising; and if the patient is strained by the shoulder when it twists, then take the instrument called "forceps," which is shaped like this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then place the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand or another object, and let the shoulder discharge according to the quantity you see; then loosen the shoulder by the shoulder blade, and keep the vein in its place as long as it is healthy and never once with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	All that is required is that the flames do not burn too much; and the safe way is to cross it, as the bone is near, and by chance, the flames break the bones when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The cure of the two veins that are in the two arms if it helps them, and the pulse, and the wound, and the tongue in the mouth, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their cure if it is that the patient pulls his collar with his neck bent in any way, as before; then the cure, and so the safe way, a little long but not wide, with fire, is preferred because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	If the flames are slight, by chance they are very; then draw out as much blood as you can, and then tie it off, and hold it in place well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	If the wound is deep and large, and there is a risk of gangrene, and other diseases of the face, such as boils and pimples that come to the face, and especially if it is old; and if the quality of the wound is that the flesh sticks to the collar, then tie the wound with your left hand, and take a small flame and light it on fire, and touch the corner of the lip that is between the two eyes, because the wound does not open well, and now it will begin to bleed; and do not make it too much, and draw out as much blood as you can, according to your need, and then tie a knot at night, because it is quickly restored; and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	1. If the skin of the two hands helps in the easing of the aliments, the beginning of masturbation, and the prevention of diseases, and herpes, and cold sweats; and if the quality of the skin is that the master pulls on his neck with both hands, as we have said; and if the master is standing at the lover's shoulder, and the lover is sitting at the head of the bed, then cleanse the vein for a long time, then draw out the blood until it is large, then cleanse the other vein in the other arm, then separate the limbs, and pull on the veins gently so that the master does not twist; and leave the patient at morning, if the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the deer
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the lips of the female deer helps to close in the mouth, and to prevent corruption of the genitals, and tears in the lips, and pain and swelling.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the patient stand before you, and hold their collar as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the eyes, of which one is on the left side and the other on the right, and they are black because of their dark color and their thin, dark eyes: therefore, choose one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then choose the largest of each pair, and do the same for all the eyes that are swollen and red, as it is a similar method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	From the health of the tongue, the language
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	If the veins of the tongue are swollen after the health of the head, and it is at the gorge, and diseases of the eyes, and diseases of the mouth; and if you quality the pain is not worse than when the patient's hands are before the sun, and the tongue is wet, and looks black in each costeit: healthy on one and the other, and do not aler too much, for they are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The swollen veins that are usually healthy in two ways: either by pressing on all the flames with a wide fire, or olive oil subtle as you cut, and are called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the fire cautery is such that it is named after a certain flame, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has the skill to open the veins with smooth, flat hairs of large blood clots, which contain large blood clots and disturbances; and this is the form of the fire cautery made of olive wood:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more delicate applied, and it is safer for the veins, or if there is delicate blood in them:
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The sainity of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are low in the throat, and neck, and stomach, and intestines; and it is necessary for the physician to cleanse wisely and avoid the artery that is affected:
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	If the artery is pricked and blood comes out, if it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said; and it should not be held too tightly in the fire, but cut if necessary.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the basin does not open clearly, if you must hold it tightly, and change another one; or you do not want any rain on it, or you want to remove it from the vein with your hand: it opens clearly; and the fire is held tightly, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	If you see the vein of the wound, if you must hold it tightly, and touch the vein as far as you can reach the flesh; then sign the vein with a mark, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with the fire on your hand; and watch that you do not hurt the artery when you see the vein swell, because it is the artery: close the donut.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you see coming out from above as the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, you should know that it is not blood: haste to you, and put your hand far away, then observe the hand where it is without stain, which many times happens; let loose the arm, and leave it, and do not move the patient; and so be careful, and do not move it until it is healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it is not stained, and it hurts you, and the doctor is not present, then if the artery is opened, because the head of the return; and observe the hand.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a scalpel from the fistula, and sharpen it, and take one of the halves and tie it well to the other; if it is not slippery, it's good; but if not, then the cure, as we have said, of the powders that make it slippery; the slipperiness is not more in other positions for the small wound of the wound, and the pain of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The health of the vein in the environment if it helps that it treats the wound with honey and cinnamon, and the corps is composed of basil and cinnamon, as we have said; and it is necessary for the physician to rest the nerve that is cinnamon, and if it does not become too large, and it heals the nerve, and it becomes inflamed and the health is gripped, and by chance it cannot be cured; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open any holes for its subtlety, then it is necessary that you cleanse the instrument; and exhale the nerve from your body.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is blood in the vein, if it is long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment of the head if it is dislocated, that it attracts blood to the chief, and helps the bones; and it is better to be helped by touching the olive flame or the iron flame, because it is the most safe of all wounds, because it does not hurt the nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	In short, it is better to try the lighter force, and do not hurt anyone the first time, and continue; and by chance, it may swell the hands of some men, but it does not hurt anyone the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your belief.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about health is that it is not obtained by chance, but rather through maintaining good health and avoiding diseases; and this health should be made in one of the three veins: head, fast, and basilic; and it should be done at the beginning of pregnancy, and during the second and third months after giving birth, when the sign of repletion appears; and it should be done on the first or second day, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The health that is maintained with diseases has no determined end, but rather when there is pain or discomfort, in all hours and at any time; and it is not necessary to make the children healthy before they are 14 years old, nor for women who are only carrying a child for four months or more.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They should not neglect even those who have passed 60 years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then, if one appears healthier, in what way that may be, if it is to deflate the intestines of a light cyste, if it has a lot of retained food, if the waters do not bring useless and harmful intestines; nor should one neglect the one who is too much in meats, or youth, even if it is caused by colic, vomiting, and disorder of the stomach, and multiplied by feminine excesses, and by labor and sleep, and that which ever the virtue, or by something of the arm or deep core; then, subtly the humors, if it is not too large, by meats and drinks and medicines, you can do without; then, take a bath, and nothing else will not bother you, to subdue the pain, and to be healthy from the womb until the third day, as we have said; and keep away from work, and pleasure, and luxury, and such things; and be modest and joyful, and be healthier than that which is neglected, and rub your arm twice or three times, then draw the line tighter, because if it is too thin or weak, you cannot hold it without; then, rub the hands with oil as much as the waters heat up, and feel on; then, make the healthier ones flame with a little oil of the other hand on that hand of the wound, so that the wound does not bleed and does not hurt.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow like cords to the physician, and if they are so many that they cause strain on the physician's strength, then when one is placed in fire, it withdraws from the fire, and cannot open the vein, and then it is one of these; and if the vein is opened, then it is the wound too tight, for which it is necessary that the physician be advised in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, then it returns a little more often to that place or at least twice, and if it does not open, it is because it is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	If the patient is small, and the man is anxious, he should leave it alone for one or two days, and do not tie the arm: by chance, corts appear; do not enter the bath, then resume the treatment if it pleases; and if the wound is small, or the subtle cort is not seen as much as the patient thinks, it is because the patient sees only what is visible, and the work is done in a short time, even if the patient is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the shoulder swell, and if you do not resume the treatment and put a little oil on it, because it softens the hard tissue, and makes it dry in this part of the shoulder that the oil touches; and then apply oil to the part of the shoulder where you have healed the wounds, to strengthen the course of the blood; and this itself makes a triage and bowels of evil, when you put the oil on the shoulder; if it is too dry, and parts when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	When there are large abscesses that come many times, if it is not healthy to have an opening of the vein that is only slightly cut, and you haste, and put a wet sponge on the shoulder and wrap it in a cloth and hold it for an hour; and it is necessary to do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if there is no black or green discharge at the shoulder after any days, if you do not know why; and if you see, put nothing on the shoulder or the wound that has been returned in warm milk, linseed, or a similar substance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is gangrene and appearance of the health of the basilica: then place your hand on it, and if the leg is cold to the touch of your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not place anything on it except what we have said, for by accident in the cut without the artery; but I made it dry to strengthen the leg, then another care, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each drop of blood according to its quantity and color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is black, then let it out as long as it is red; and if you see it large, then let it out as long as it is thinner; and if it is too hot, then let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	1. It is necessary for those who are in pain and distress, and have skill in extracting sinews, to make a larger wound, and let the flaps be wide; and for those who are weak, the opposite is done, and it is made safer and often, and it should be made safer by cutting across, not pinching; and this way of making safe is saved from the collapse of sinews and the weariness of nerves, and it is worth while that the safe wound does not have to be too long.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	1. And for the one whose heart needs to be in place, it is necessary to give a thin paste of green pomegranate juice; if it is scarred, it should be pricked with hot sinew III times or IV. If it is of cold complexion, it should be mixed before the thin paste with honey muzzle, or with aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a very fragrant honey.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If it is not in the state of health, after the evacuation of blood, if it happens that it becomes moist with char and a subtle odorant syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter of sincope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If it sees its arm becoming unhealthy again, and if it happens that it becomes healthier at another time, if it occurs when it is weakened by great health, it becomes healthy little by little according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If it sees its arm becoming unhealthy after the first health, and it is strong, if it becomes healthy seven hours after the first health, or after the next hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one part appears healthier than the other, then it is healthier to treat the other part the following day or the next.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For the patient has blood flow from the arm that has been swollen, and brings on fever; if it comes to a great amount, and opens the wound as much as it can, then when you treat all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the pulse as soon as it becomes healthy, so that the death does not come from the pangs of the womb, and this happens many times when the healthier ones are neglected; and it is necessary to see if the arm sweats the second time, and let the blood flow, and the wound is closed, then you must press on it; but if it is cold, then extend the arm as quickly as possible, because it would be harmful; but leave it as long as it is healthy the second time; or if you do not reach the tip of the flame, until the limb that is frozen from the vein is no longer open, and puts back the seal in the heat, and presses gently on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be left alone and do not strain it until the abscess is eased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to draw blood the second time, then draw it from the same vein or from another one, or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy because it is not compressed by the clothing.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	If the vein in the arm is swollen and red due to heat, then tie it loosely and make sure the vein is clear and not too large; if it is still swollen, tie it tighter near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be tied, remove the hand from the heat and let the blood flow into the hand until you have enough; if this does not work, do not tie the hand in hot water because it will cause more harm than good; the vein from this arm is safer than all other veins because it has not been harmed or cut.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The patient's hand is diseased if it causes all stomach ailments, and this is the way to treat it: tightly wrap the hand with warm cloth, as long as the vein is not cold, if you can; and if the hand is clean, and you cover it entirely, without causing any harm; and do not apply too much heat, as the skin is bare and prone to frostbite, and then return the hand to warm cloth, if it does not cause pain in the wound.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated all the pus as much as possible, if you put oil on the vein and seal it with a bandage, and then make a stitch for each hole.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The patient with the illness of the hand if it is worth the disease of the mouse, and I do everything as I have said towards the left.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The health of the sophene if it is worth all the diseases that are lacking in the heart, such as diseases of the lungs, and retention of flowers, and disease of the liver, and diseases of the knees and ankles, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of his health if it is that the patient has feverish cold, and wash the vein as much as it bleeds, and press on the joint of the pierce; and the vein if it is at the ankle, and by pressing the pierce out of the rain, the rain goes to the knees; then it is that the rain is large or at the ankle, which is worth.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	If you are healthy in your mind, if you have nerves that are not diseased, and the safe one crosses as well as in copulating; then let the old flames burn.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	If you cannot get it up, if you put your mind in the sweat, and let the vein well dry out.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	If you become aroused for the first time, if it resumes in a second with less pressure, because the seed is salty; do not doubt of nerves, as we have said, and then make sure of the other part perfectly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The seed from the vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its health is at the pain of the thigh, when it is due to inflammation.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	1. And the quality of its health if it is that the patient enters or baths, and draws out the ankle IV times while twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then the healthy in all ways that you see, and crossing; and it is wise to copy it, as the leus is true, and it is repaired in the hands of men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	2. And if you do not true it, then the healthy no one of the who opens or back of the door, and to the little do, and you see the nerves; and make so much blood that you see, and then let loose the lien, and put on cotton and draw; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	Of wounds from ventouse
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Wounds from ventouses are made of horn, or iron, or silver; and ventosations are made in two ways: either by cutting and drawing out blood, or by cutting without causing bleeding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventosation which is made by cutting is made in two ways: either it is all on fire, or it feels hot; and a ventosation made by cutting and drawing out blood is made in fourteen hours, and the whole of it is in one chief; and the other is in the col; and the others in the costeis dou col; and the ventouse of the menton; and the ventouse of the espaules; and the ventouse of the crupies; and the ventouses of the bras; and the ventouses of the jambes; and the ventouses of the chevilles; and the ventosation never touches blood, for only small wounds that are scattered in the skin, and therefore no one gets infected as we make a wound of the skin; and it is only necessary that it be cured, and not all on fire or feeling hot, in any disease that comes from repletion, as long as the whole of the skin is dry.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	1. And if necessary for diseases, or due to habits, if the patient has a fever every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and also in each ten; for there are those who, when they have to vomit, have a heavy stomach; and if such people have fullness and bruising in their face, and in their belly, and at the collar, and are pale; and those who have a flux of blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and spit blood; and if it is those who sneeze, and see blood through their nose, and feel cold, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and at the same time when it is three hours past noon, we command our patient to rest for an hour.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The salve for the head helps to relieve the pain... that comes when the hair grows, and it is only after all the blood has been evacuated; and this resting is for the benefit of the patient's head, and it is only for those who have a cold complexion or who are pale, as this does great harm; and therefore it is only for the watchmen to use, or those who have cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often recover, if they become oblivious, and for this it is necessary to place the gauze a little further down due to the fear of obstruction.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation of the neck is in the shoulder of the healthy chest and the basilic vein, and for this it is useful in relieving pain, and for cutting off the chancre of the penis, and for all, and for repletion; and it is necessary to put it on a little loosely, because if it is too tight, it can cause obstruction or stomach or liver.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation of the collar is in the shoulder of the healthy chest and can relieve pain, and it eases and alleviates, and prevents strangulation, and the pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the basilic vein; and it is necessary that you command the patient to express his hand when putting it on, that he does not cut the artery, and does not cause dislocation of the joint.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Dislocations are caused by no joint of its own body, since it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like, "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Dislocations are caused by no joint of its own body,
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Dislocations are caused by no joint of its own body, and the patient should be advised to avoid strenuous activity for a while, as the shoulder is not strong enough to bear it, and knows how to relax and constrict blood vessels. Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like, "Wow this is hard!", etc.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	1. The ventilator that is placed on the chest if it causes deep discomfort and many diseases, and it must be large and have sharp points to be able to draw well; by chance, if it is too subtle, it may break; and it causes great pain.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	1. The ventilators on the legs are healthy when they open widely, as they draw blood from the entire body, and relieve old pains from rheumatism, gout, and bladder problems, and open the veins; and they are in the leg veins and thighs, and they cause the body to weaken after long use, and bring pain in more positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	1. The manner to insert the cautery is if you put it first empty, and then afterward, fill it, and move it evenly, and continue doing this until you see the red and swollen part of the shoulder, and the wound becomes apparent; then stop, and remove the cauteries, and prepare the dressing in the position of the arms, because there are some who have very large veins and thin skin: if it is to be injured only once, and to make large wounds and a few bruises; and lightly touch it.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	2. And if it is not large, if it is injured twice: the first time by making the vein of the shoulder more subtle;
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is not quickly treated, it can be injured a third time; and when we want to draw out little blood at a time, it only happens once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to draw out blood, we often renew it; and if it is not quickly treated, it may become infected, and it ends up being noticed when the skin is sensitive, and those who have thick skin and hardness, and who have rough edges, you should apply oil-based ointments that are penetrating and dissolving: if this is the case, olive oil, or honey from sweet almonds, or sunflower seed oil; and if it is for gold, hazelnut oil, or lily, or chamomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	If the excess is large and cold, then take oil of lavender, or balsam of Hippo, or oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	If the skin is healthy and wide pores, it is not recommended to apply oil, but it is recommended to wash afterwards after the application of rose water, or cold water, or mushroom water, or onion vinegar, or porcelain vinegar, or other similar substances.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if the mouth is dry, then it is recommended to use oil of aloe, or rose water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive superfluity rise from wine vile, or from ague of sweat, or from decoction of anet or chamomile, or from other similar things; and they do not become healthier before bathing but after bathing, but an hour or two; and they do not sleep after ventilating, and they must ventilate when they are hot and when they are hot-ventilated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And if those who are in health are cold-blooded and too hot and inflamed, then it comes that they need to eat things that are cold, such as pomegranates, endives, and leeks, and similar things; and they need to drink milk, and charred meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with cold complexion, if they crave honey syrup, and sweet wine odorant moien, which is between viel and noveil, and drink little, and drink poc, and pucins and small oiselz and pijons; and when they start to vomit, it must drink more than mengier; and it is necessary to give some men once triaicle or muscate before the ventosacion, or after, to comfort the principal members; and let them be subtle in the without, but only those who are chaut the boivent.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The stings that are made to hurt are those that are made in the liver, and in the spleen, and gout, and in the stomach and bowels and intestines and bladder, for this member does not suffer much hurt outside, and only causes pain when it attracts sanc from member to member, as we do with the mameles when they are not sainne; to remove the viscositeit that is in the member, as we do with the stomach and bowels to anmenuisier the member; and to relieve the pain, when it has opilation or pierre, if it can attract the opilation by its virtue, or desert the pierre of his leu; and then it is made to ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, and these stings are administered empty to suck only; and never are administered together fire, and no plains of aigue tede, as in many diseases of pleuresin, and in such way we fill the sting with hot aigue soule, or with aigue that has been cooked herbs in it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the forceps administered by fire is:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two palm-wide and half inches of parchment, and has one cost at the top of the little pus, like a needle, and is made of iron, and has a notch on the other side so that it does not hurt the patient when inserting it into the member; and in the middle, there is a groove of iron or of brass, to hold a thrusting needle, and in this there are large and small ones according to the diseases and the pain of those who take them; for the forceps of children are not like needles, nor thin like fat, but they are made of iron.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	The following line should be translated as: "And then put the vacuum tube on the member: take the cork or liniment, and insert it into the vacuum tube through the hole that is in the vacuum tube, so that it does not melt at the end of the vacuum tube; and then place it on the member, and your must be as we have said, if you see, if there is steam, and then you take the vacuum tube; and take the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you have skill.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the vacuum that is maintained in a patient with pneumonia, there is no hole or perforation, and it is not infected unless it is only when it is clear of phlegm, and it is placed on the member only when it is; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without doubt, dislocations are not found except in joints where it is not possible to put a splint due to their small size, such as the lips and genitals, and similar parts; and in them, the bones are lacking in cartilage, and others are like this; and the quality of the user is that when you find dislocations that are in soft waters, if you take them; and put them in a soft water, as long as they are not pregnant, and have nothing in the belly; then it is healthy and cleansed, then wash the member as much as it is red, and put on the splint; and when they become flat and smooth, and turn white, if it is the leg or the arm, put it on, because this is afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then raise the leg of the affected side, and then the knee; and if the patient is too cold after the corset, then soak a piece of linen in cool water, and put it on, as long as the leg is cold; and if the leg is frozen, then put a piece of hot iron or glowing coals on it, and similar things, until it is warmed up; or you can half-peel the feet of wet leather, and leave them as they are on the foot, if it becomes warm now; and if you have more time, then take other frozen feet.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not take on the salve, if you rub the lew with fresh sanc, or thrust a needle as much as it will go, and then insert it, and as they feel the sanc, if they smart; and when you see that they seize, if you dust some aloe and flax, or charcoal, if they now burn.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the beginning of the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Ask, gentlemen, what the folk think of this chapter, that they see no use in it, and no ancient books or letters; and for this reason, science has been neglected in our country, because I have never found any book; and I know nothing, only that by the science of ancient books, or by my study and treatment of the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life, and I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the strains that are cut, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say at the beginning of this book the sum of words and chapters or the surgeon puts his understanding, and studies the truth, so that those who have experienced it may know this noble art, and learn it for others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that if any fracture, dislocation, torsion, or twisting occurs to no one, if it comes to pass that you must cut off the flesh of the patient on both sides, without anything else being harmed, whether it be by forceps, catguts, or sutures; or if you hold him tightly and he is not very thin, nor too fat; and if his face is cold, it is to know that the cold joules, and the char of oak and horn, and he does not drink wine, nor eat raw meats, and does not fill his veins with blood, as long as you do not doubt of apoplexy coming, or expansion of matter in the member; if the patient's flesh returns to its former state, as it was under the same government as it had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the bones begin to heal, if it is necessary to remove the patient's food, either because of large stools or because of viscosity, like bread cooked in wine, and tests, and pies, and pancakes made with wheat, fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the stool becomes less and the fracture is repaired sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And you advise that the bones broken and decayed cannot be well recovered or mended according to their nature by the care of the limbs, nor those who are too soft; but if it is necessary to break the bone and join the joints together as much as possible, then it should be done in the same way as before, and not allowed to go hungry for long periods of time, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	The treatises mention various types of fractures in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	However, the fracture of the head is different from that of the leg or arm, and I will tell you about all types of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are fractures that occur when struck, and others when grazed, like the size of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a small nick can cause a break.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each fracture has its own mechanism and instrument for restoration, according to the remembrance that comes to their mind; and the fracture of the bone is caused by the bone being twisted, and widely open by deformed, and some under pressure of the hand; and if it is not twisted or cut, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture, but it may have twisting, or nick, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you can only manage to move it with your hand, but take the medicine that comes after, and then try again gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then assess the fracture that will occur in the wound, and the two parts that are dislocated. It is now appropriate to stabilize them as evenly as possible, unless the patient becomes faint or dizzy; and if the patient becomes faint and passes out, until the faintness has passed, then it should be gently and wisely placed at the edge of the bed and the patient should be encouraged that the restoration of the dislocated part is lighter than the restoration of bones or pieces; then the patient is extracted, as it is appropriate to do after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	When there are broken pieces in the bone of the foot, if they are two parts, it is hands or feet, or a part of your hand is small members, or two strings, or one string and your hand; and put the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are adjusted, if you adjust by your own means the additions in their place in the bone that you please, and keep that by your effort does not cause the surgeon's injury or pain; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And it feels good to the hand if it seems that it is not well: if it curves beautifully and is not strained too much, do not press as those who come by their own effort make the wound and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	When the limb is at rest, if the patient carefully keeps it still, neither by day nor by night, nor when turning in bed, nor in any other way, then the limb should be firmly held so that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when there is no pain, if it is not yet at rest, and it is necessary to put the limb in its proper position so that it does not feel any pain; and you should hold it steady so that twisting does not occur when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I will tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Saws that the broken limbs are of different sizes in smallness and large size and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For if it has bitten members, as if they were twisted and similar: if it comes with rolled linen and fine threads; and those that are large, like a thick leg: if it comes with rolled wide and hard threads, for the wide bands encompass all the large member, and draws it evenly, unless it has no taich; then it lightly winds around the limbs three times or four according to the member, and draws the hand tightly along all the linen, then goes to the end of the fracture and draws it less, that the fracture can slightly move the part; and softens the linen a little by little, as much as you can reach a large part of the healthy limb, then take another linen, turn it over towards the broken part, and then return to the part opposite the fracture, and draw it gently, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first step of the fracture; then put between the wounds of linen or threads, as they are equal, then tie all with a bendil, and then put your good stitches on, if it has not aposteme or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if it has been struck or infected, if he puts something soothing on the infected part and leaves it alone for some time; then he should tightly hold his eyes, and they should be of a width equal to one-third of a wide knife, or of a fist that is used for fighting, or of rains from palm trees, and they should be like this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the thing he puts on the wound is larger and broader than the others; and it should also be as long as it is necessary for the small or large member; then tightly hold the eyes as you did in the first part, then tie a thread around it as you did in the first part, but do not make it too tight, less is better; and the thread must be smooth, neither too thick nor too thin, and it should be of linen; for if the thread is too thick, like the works of the fools who make their laces with linen threads, it is a great error, because the wound cannot be even if it is too fine, and it can only be between each eye less than an inch wide.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is anesthetized by the heads of the pins after the extraction in healthy people, then they should be covered with linen or silk, if it does not cause pain.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splint, and the bones are broken, I will tell you the treatment for this afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And be careful that it is not too tight on all the broken limbs at once.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to put on splints immediately, but rather after several hours or days, or according to the patient's strength; and this is the way the ancient emplausters were used to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that is ground as fine as flour from a molin, mix it with a lot of water, and make a dough with it, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way to restore fractures in other positions, and even in women and small children, because it is not too tight nor too harsh.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	1. Another way to mend fractures and dislocations and twists: take garlic, vinegar, oil of cinnamon, Arabian gum, and musk, in equal parts; mix with aloe, in equal parts; and make a powder, and mix with the fat of onions; if the complexion of the face is hot, use this ointment as it is of good composition and restores broken bones quickly and benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	1. Another way to mend twists: take Arabian gum and vinegar, in equal parts; mix with aloe, in equal parts; acetic acid, in small amounts; arsenic, in large amounts; and cook well, and mix with vinegar or fat of onions, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other ways to apply plasters to joints and bones, and alleviate the pain coming, and the wound uses of the bone, and the bandage: take new cloths, and the oil in a bowl and cooked, and put on the leg.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Other plasters do not heal, but it is necessary to alleviate inflammation and bone pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Other ways to apply plasters that heal broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and earth oak leaves, and bind them together, and make the plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Other ways to apply plasters for healing of bone fractures and to reduce inflammation.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	1. Gather the roots of malva, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of violets, and each part in equal measure; and grind them, and mix with wine, and wash your limbs with cool water, or with cold water, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	2. Another way to emplaister more forcefully than the first, when the wound is deep and comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	3. Gather the roots of malva, and linseed meal, balsam, honey, and violet flowers and each part in equal measure; grind them, and mix with cool water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the chalor of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In the book of Ypocras, it is stated that nothing is used to set a broken bone for restoration, except for wax and oil, and no other thing is used. And he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems that Galen says that to set a broken bone for restoration, one should use dry, hot things, such as mirrors and aloes, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to describe the value of a wound and pain: take a knife and needles made of hooves, or feathers, and vismalve, and seil igalment, and the broie, and make an application and put it on the limb.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the patient will feel better in a short while, and if there is no pain in the joint or the bones of the limb, and if there is inflammation or itching, and you hurry to remove it, and apply the plaster now; then gently dampen a cloth, soak it in sea water, dip it in cold water, and lift the limb until the itching stops and the pain subsides; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, moisten it with cold or olive oil, and tie it up, as long as you are sure not to have gangrene; then allow the inflammation in the member to subside and the pain to disappear, and then resume the application of the plaster lightly, a little at a time, and do not strain it too much; and gradually until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the wound is swollen, bleeding, and painful, and it has become inflamed, then you have the skill to plaster and bandage, if it recurs, as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If you do not see any sign of what we have said, if it does not come to the member for three, four, seven, or ten days; and never more than twenty days, as long as the fracture is healing and approaches the bone; then the restraint must be greater, and the tissue grows larger, as I have said before; and if you see the skin becoming harder than it should, watch for signs of infection; apply warm tea to the member every time you see it, and do this every hour, and also use a cloth to cover the member; through this process, you will cut off the infection at the member, and mend whatever damage was done to the flesh, so that the member returns to its normal state: this is good, and if it is done correctly, there will be no more pain or discomfort.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various kinds of wounding
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of wounds, and various shapes; for there are wounds made by the blow of a spear, and which pierce the bone all the way through to the other side, as if it were hazel or ivory; and therefore this kind of wound is called "hazel" wound.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the spear strikes the bone in different directions and is called this kind of wound "absolute"; and these are the wounds of these two large or small gashes.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is a percussion, or a thrust, or a piercing, or a cut through the pierce, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If there is a constant fracture, which draws close the skin that is loose from the bone, or it is under the bone, and this wound or large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	If a wound that is healed in the bone as well as under it, and is a small cut, and for this it is called the "capillary fracture"; and if the wound that is made by injury, or by piercing, or by something seeming, and lets the piece of the bone enter, and is the same size as when they were heated during the forging; if it enters through the piercing.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And then comes what happens underneath, which have either dry bones or wet ones like children; and they happen in all these ways of fracture that are light in pieces if they are like these; and I will speak of it in their language.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us see all ways of fractures by the method they have, and through inquiry, and by the corrupt char that is there.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hairy skin is known by what happens when one discovers the bone, and one rubs with the finger, if the dark fracture is not open.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, take care of the patient's condition, and if you see no accidents, it is like vomiting of bile, and admission, extension, and swelling, and fever, and the wound turning pink and red, and other signs that appear in various dispositions, if it cannot be cured with doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a dangerous accident, and you hope for a quick recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the bone comes first to you, and it is in the wrist, then it is necessary to treat the bone before the fourteenth day at the doctor's office that you should go.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this way, then if you hurry to treat the bone before the ninth day, unless the bone has already become corrupted and the accident we mentioned comes.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture comes just before the wound closes, and it is necessary to cut off the broken part: and it is that you ignite the chief of the new wound, and uncover the bone in all the ways you can, and uncover the shape of the wound more so than you can, and if blood comes out to expose the bone, or gangrene occurs, then help yourself as you can, and it is that you fill the wound with oiled soft cloths; and let the wound rest until the gangrene is subsided and is secured from decay; then begin to treat the bone, and it is done according to two ways of dissection: one way if you cut at the narrow end in the shape of a form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I cut it in another, larger piece than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is if you have many different sizes, some thin and others wide, and they are sharp, and they are of iron; and you cut them lightly, so you do not cut the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and brittle, then you must perceive it by piercing with a needle, otherwise you must sharpen the edges with tweezers, not making them too thick that they do not pass over the bone; and you must have more of them, so that each time it happens in the joint of the bone, if you have tweezers for your test; and this is the form of the three ways of tweezers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of perceiving through the broken bone is that you place your thumb on the bone, and turn it around as much as you can until you feel the bone is perceived; then put your thumb on another part a little later, and then do everything, and cut the incisions in the bone that are between the holes, and do it as subtly as you can, and gently, as we have said, as long as you trace the bone with your hand, or with any of the tweezers you have, like needles; and make sure you do not touch the brain or the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perceived and cut the bone, if it covers the opening that the bone makes in the other instrument as an incision, but it should be smaller and more subtle than the other incision; and if it does not cover any small bones, nor any scales, if the light bones are gently with the tweezers; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of opening is when it is done by the Galians, who are more skilled; and the hardest, and that is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone, where the fracture is open and visible, so that once you have removed this part, measure from the top of this incision, the curve of this lenticular incision, which is as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut too much, and the part that is cut should be in two layers, if the cutting is towards the bone; then with a small nail, if you lightly touch the bone all around, and keep well guard of the cloth that is on it; if it is near the bone, as the bone is sensitive, and is felt with pain, and is feared.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only crushed by the hands, and it has small pieces, then cover those sharp edges with something, and file down the scales using a subtle raser, of which you must have several quantities to meet the needs of each limb according to the extent of the fracture and its appearance.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you sharpen before with great rasers, and then with more subtle ones, and continue doing this as much as it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In every other hair cutting and subtle fracture, it is necessary to meet the needs according to its direction; and this is something that cannot be denied to the one who has studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	When the scar is discovered, if it is necessary to apply linen to the wound according to its size, and mixed with oil of rosemary, and placed on the wound; then take another doubled bandage of II or III, and mixed with wine and oil of rosemary, and placed over the first bandage; and apply it more gently than you would, so as not to burn the scar, then dress with other linen, and do not strain it too much, only as much as it adheres to the wound; and leave it for II or III days, until the swelling is subsided, then remove it, and apply medicines such as roots of lis, flour of times, powder of incense, aristolochum, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and apply other medicines without soreness; and when the wound is clean, do not leave the ointment or assemble bowels, for if bowels assemble under the skin, they can cause great harm to the patient; for if something malicious is placed on the scar, it can cause pain.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	When a patient is about to undergo surgery, if no accidents have occurred in the past, and as we have said, if there is any doubt, then it is not certain what will happen.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no pain is felt during the surgery, and it is only due to the medicine that has been given, then if a part of honey is ingested along with three parts of rose oil and one drop of glue, and it is mixed with water, then the cure can be applied in various ways until the patient is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Wounds that are never broken are the two bones that are often injured, or only one, because they are two bones; and this is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it becomes healthy.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should cut off your small did or pertuss and place it equally on your index finger, and in the pouch until it returns to its natural shape; and do this lightly, and let the patient feel no pain through your touch.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part of the nail, and cannot be brought to the root, then you should place it equally at the base of a large nail.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, then you should re-do it and restore the first joint, if possible; if not, after the second or third time, when the inflammation has subsided, then cut off the nail at the base, using scissors, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If you cut at another part, it will be; and let the wounds be as large as they fill the cavities.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And no restorer would say that one must smooth the wounds in burrs, and each one would die.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It seems to me that it is well, but the wounds must be smoothed in the making of oven ashes and powdered mill; then leave the wound, as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilage is firm.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And no time is it cut on the neck of the wound, and if it is soft and draped, and holds the bridle, and blows the salve among; or do as you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if you have a wound, the cauterizing iron comes to the affected part while you are working, and if it is placed with fine thread or silk soaked in rose oil, or in the mouth of a vial.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have a wound, the cauterizing iron does not come to the affected part, and if it is placed with plaster made of flour of barley and incense powder, mixed with egg butter, then it is covered with light sponge pieces, and the wound is not closed; and if the wound is small, and it is torn into small pieces, if the stitches are comfortable for this, then cut the thread, and the cure of things strangely shaped is sown, and sewn, as with plasters and ointments suitable for this; and if there is no wound on the skin, the wound is cured by bandages, and it is stitched with needles as much as necessary to make it healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the dislocation of the lower jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the lower jaw is dislocated, there is no wound, and the fracture is not severe, but only slightly so, and it is not broken into several pieces, but rather a single piece that can be bent slightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary to note that if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, you should place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, you should place your index finger on the left hand, gently bend the fracture, and then hold it with the other hand to prevent further damage.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the lower jaw is described as II, then it is necessary to administer an extension of II parts, as long as they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth move, or fracture, then the patient should use a gold, silver, or silk thread to secure the broken lower jaw to the dislocated part, and then place a large staple or piece of leather along and across the jaw, and fasten it to the muscle that is being used, and instruct the patient to rest, and provide light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, and if it moves to another point, and then return it to its original position; and apply powder with a lot of urine or flour from the grain mill, after you have osteit the cerote; and apply light emplaustre, and when it is set, and the disposition of the malaide does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; several times it is healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	If the abscess ruptures, then it is best to follow what we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If there is a fracture and wound combined, the piece of bone that is exposed is a flat piece of the bone; if the bones are subtle and flexible, they can be easily bent.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is wide, it should be widened according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have all the bones in place and there is no pain, if the wound is wide, make sure it is large and stitch it with flexible stitches to hold it together and heal.
de la forcele	Of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks more often in front of, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two, and it has pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or it is broken with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the dislocation is when the break is felt as pain, that you have two assistants, if one of them touches the injured shoulder that feels the strength of the break; and the other extends the collar towards the part; then place the dislocation in your two hands, so that it forms as it should, and there should be no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	If you have further work to do, place the shoulder bone of the patient at a distance from the mallet with a round or flat bead of linen, or cloth, and make it as large as needed; then gently apply force and pull the bead towards your hand so that you can evenly close the fracture, just like we do.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you do not want to cut the head of the mallet with the force, because it comes off easily, then it may cause the mallet to turn in its socket, and place the shoulder bone at a distance from the eye, and pull the muscles of the shoulder away from the eye, as long as the head of the force remains raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the fracture to your two bones, and if you find the fragments loose, then you must cut them off; and take care not to cut through the pieces too much, and if they cannot be joined by any means, it is likely that the tool has struck one of the incisors you have; but make sure to use the right force with this instrument to avoid damaging the face.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not too thick, and should be as wide as it appears to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the will; and if there are any fragments, if you see them, and some are large, and others small, if they are the fragments of the fracture you made when you treated the bones; and if you feel aposteme chaut, if the wound is large, or you doubt aposteme chaut, if you use the wound with drapels and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the abscess bursts and comes out, if it is filled with oil of rosemary and saffron and wine, it should be cleaned.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And the treatment of the bone is when it feels pain and seems too small, you should put the bone on a mill of fine powder of rosemary and saffron and wine, and light sponge on it, and a small hole in the wound; then take a very large palm leaf, then put the damp sponge on the sponges, and press; then take a fine needle of three to four inches long and long, and wrap around the braid, so that the end of the braid remains; then put the needle on the wrist, and turn the braid around the wrist, and soak the clean bone in unsalted oil, and soak the salty bone; and pull each part, and when you see that the braid holds the wrist well, and you can clearly see that the needle does not stick to the bone, if the reward is for each, and when it tightens, if the restraint; and make sure the mace on its back, and it puts when it goes to sleep a small pillow of oil on the wound, or lift the helper up; if the fracture is closed by the alignment of the shoulder or the arm at the shoulder, or you put the arm against the collar, and does not slip out of hand accidents do not come, just twenty days; then resume the pressing, if it seems to have merit, and pull it out and leave it as it is, until it is restored; and it is restored in the most 28 days, and less for any man.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the break of the elbow
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the elbow breaks or widens, and it does not fit well, and it cannot be put back in place; if the humerus follows the shape of the break, and the bone is reshaped according to its natural form, in all possible ways that you can; then take some powdered sulfur with a lot of urine, and light spices, and place a flexible plate larger than the elbow, and make sure it fits well on no part of the elbow, if you use a soft cheese cloth, so that the plate sits evenly; then tie it tightly with a rope or cord, so that the plate does not move from its place, and watch the line every time it loosens, and whenever it tightens, and moves the plate when it is free from the bone, and look at the pain on his chest; and the elbow is restored in 20 days or 25, and when those numbers are completed, if you leave him, and be sure, because only lightness is put in place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is found to be weakened beforehand, and it does not bend, if it is found, and the bone, and make what we have said in the breaking of the force of the painful abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is never broken in a million years, but this does not happen; but it often breaks in the winter.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in two, if it is not bent, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and open the chest in the broken bones, and it seems well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the patient's shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it cannot stay in place despite being reset repeatedly, first reset the dislocation. If the dislocation persists, it may be due to corrosion or pruritus that comes to the affected area, or pain or aposteme if there is any, then remove the plaster, and address whatever came from the methods of treatment. Then reapply the plaster as needed until it is in its proper place.
de la brisure des costes	Of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The symptoms of the rib fracture are that it only occurs after a great blow to the back and chest, and does not cause much pain in the investigation; it is well understood.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you wish to set the fracture, as it should be done.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then place the splint, and tighten it with a staple, if you have the skill.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is displaced towards the chest, it causes great pain and pressure, like giving birth; the chest does not fit well; they tie it, and then vomit large amounts of blood, and this is a sign of serious illness, and the ancients have often put a large bandage on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	If it is said that it should be administered animals that inflame the stomach, by putting the bracelet on the shoe.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this mistake, that ashes do not come, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it comes, if it is good.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And none of them say that they put ventsouces on the shoulder, for sweetening, and it seems right; however, doubt is that the ventsouce does not attract the excess to the shoulder because of the position of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And none of them say that they should cover the shoulder with soft oiled gauze and put tents between the ribs to measure the hour accurately, then treat the pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure through the bone that pierces the tissue, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the shoulder blade where the rib is broken, and it is necessary to put on an instrument to hold the face; therefore, it must be fractured the bone, and it should be drawn lightly, and then the edges of the wound are sewn if they are large, and it is cured from plasters as long as it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	2. If an abscess comes, if it is covered with soft ointment, and it is covered with cloth; and treat while the wound is coming out of the abscess, and it should be cleaned under the cost over where it needs to be, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	Of the wound of the shoulder
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a wound to the shoulder bone, and rarely does it happen; and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when you see it is not, and you know if it will be alive or not, if you see your hands soft and swollen and lifeless, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	It is said that it is mortal in many positions, and if they are held still and feel well when extracted and not, it is said that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if it is put to proper care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if you are careful to see if the bones are broken, and the accidents that are in the hands, and if the loins jump and there is egestion with will; and when it is sawn at its stomach, there is egestion with will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is sawn at its back and you see that it is boiling, if it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Says that it is mortal: if it does not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come, then it is the more lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	1. If the patient is in pain due to the wound, if it is an abscess that has burst, then put on olive oil or oil of myrrh as much as possible; then put on a comfortable plaster and bandage, and tie it with a string, and tell the patient to rest; do not sleep more than that part of the body where the pain is felt, as long as it is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	2. If any bones break, then put on a bandage around the joint; then open the wound, if it is large, stitch it together with one stitch, then dress the wound with ointment, as much as possible; and if the bone is broken, which is called the "broken bone," take your left hand pouch from your right hand, and put it on the other hand at your foot, then put on the plaster and bandage, if you can; then pull it out, and if it has broken, then set it and treat the wound as much as possible.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the fracture of the bone of the shinbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	There comes a time when the shinbone is fractured, and if it does, it is not usually a minor injury to the head; it becomes long, and slopes downwards, and pain comes to the leg, the knee, and the wound is swollen.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that if you extend your hand over it as long as you are on the fracture; examine what the fracture and its appearance are like; and if the fracture is only at the top, place it in natural position as much as possible.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	If the fracture is long or it declines towards the dens, then I advise the surgeon to operate on the patient's abdomen as long as the restoration of this fracture depends on you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	If you have placed it evenly, then place the plaster on it, then place a piece of wool or feather, and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and then apply the shoulder to the ribs, as long as the swelling is equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	If the abscess is opened and there is no pain, then as long as the abscess is not painful, put on the dressing we have mentioned before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no other accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	The first sentence to translate is "de la brisure de l'ajutoire". The translation is "of
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The second sentence to translate is "Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, sekon ceste forme:". The translation is "The assistant is the one that is between the shoulder bone and the shoulder blade of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then you must restore it according to one of the following two methods: one of which is to take a piece of green gourd, in this form:".
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	The third sentence to translate is "Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en hup, et siece li malaide sur I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sur le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covante." The translation is "And the patient can move the limbs and sit up, and the surgeon sits on the seat; then the broken arm is placed on the fist, as it goes to the elbow, and has a crutch of the fist, then it can bear any heavy thing or extend the hand; then the surgeon places the brace in his hands together, as long as the brace returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is if one binds the patient to their horror, and holds their hand to their collar, then commands the ministers to mark the ones that are at the bracelet on their hands, and the others mark them differently everywhere they can, and extend each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then pull the hands apart and stretch them as much as possible, and extend each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the bracelet is close to the shoulder blade, then it is necessary to make the hands moist and stretch them away from the shoulder; and if the bracelet is towards the elbow, then it is necessary to gently place the hands on the shoulder and elbow, as long as the bracelet is even with the shoulder and elbow, and then tighten the bracelet as much as possible, without moving.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	When the bone is dislocated, if it is not reduced within seven days, and it is oiled and greased on all sides, until the dislocation is reduced; then it is reduced, and the manner of reducing it, if you place the splint on the swelling, then assemble the arm on the helper, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and then reduce it with the helper and the arm, if the arm is in its place, nothing will deter you, or if the bone is not movable.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone does not move, if you use splints, and place the fracture on a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have between each splint one of spacers of bone or wood, and each spacer be as large as it passes over the fracture three times; then reduce the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more firmly and less by moving them apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	If you see the seating of the elbow, and the stretching, as we have said, in the part that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the aposteme chaut, if you let it alone for one day, if we have said; then look at each third day the link, that prurite does not inflame or come to the elbow because it is too estrois.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come, if it is not that after three or more days, and sleeps the patient on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and put the assistant I cussin plain linen, and look at each hour of day or night, that the broken member does not move, or is not softened the ligaments; if the address by the virtue of medicine, and the meat that we have before us, in such a way that the meat is subtle; and when it comes to resume, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the helper and the leg should be restored in 40 days or less; therefore, one must ease and administer baths and remedies for the joint to heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is thick and blocked, it should be eased and delayed for 40 days or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the wrist fracture
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "little" and "big" humerus, of one of which is smaller and forms the pocket; and the other is larger and is the one that is out of place, either the small or the large humerus, by chance.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the little bones are broken, the repairs are light, and the cures; and when the large ones are broken, if it is a poor cure, and more pained than when they were broken individually.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the little bones that are broken, then it will be necessary to extend lightly and put equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, then it will be necessary to stretch more forcefully; and extend over the wrist, and raise the thumb higher than the others, and the fingers below the others, and let the maladies rest on its own, and the thumb higher, so that the maladies do not suffer any labor; then extend the other bones of the arm to the opposite side of the hand, or to the elbow, and some other bones to the other side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he places the head in its proper position, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, he puts each in its place, and if there are none that point to the bone that is broken, and you cannot restore it in its place, then as we have said before, set and the bone.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaking of the wound, I have spoken to the single cauterist; if he takes care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration, aphid bites occur, if the glove made of rose oil and wax is not too hard or too soft, and it is draped over subtly, as long as the aphid bites are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then the bone, and he puts the plaster of powdered earth with much urine, for it puts the threads, and so the end of the braiding is further, and a little wider than the others; and you measure that it must have six threads or arms in more positions: whether it is the braiding in one of the bones, or in two; and it is drawn more under the braiding than elsewhere, and less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and the threads that are under the braiding are wet and moist, and not too hard or rough; and the thread, which is drawn out, is linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	The patient should reward the arm and the joint after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	If any accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, if you must warm the limb with hot water until the itching is relieved; then let the limb rest in its place.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then resume the tightening, and if the joints are softened and the bones are exposed, it seems like this, if it happens.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If no injuries come to the limb, because it is too loose, if you must soften the limb in your hand, let it rest for some time until the injuries are healed, and then tighten it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things come to the patient, if he does not loosen the joint in 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If the patient is not found, then he can put his hands on his chest, and it should be equal; and he should make little movement and relaxation, and sleep on his back; and after 30 days or 35, or in 20 days, depending on the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the shoulder injury
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Watches that on the back of the hand and we have two come few injuries, and only twisting many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	When the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, if the patient can manage to hold it steady, and then put his hand on the extended leg; he extends the fingers of the broken bones, and places them evenly in the holes, as far as they are well joined; then he applies plaster and bandages, if necessary, and puts it on according to the size of the leg; and it should be wrapped in a fold of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	If the fracture is at the heel of the foot, I make a gauze sponge, and instruct the patient to tie it around his broken heel; then he ties a long gauze, and it should be as large as the sole of the hand, and he ties it, if possible.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	When the fracture is at the neck, if it comes to passing a nail through, and another through the plant, if the hand is over and straight, then the piece will entirely pass through the hand, and it will be stretched between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	When the fracture comes to neither of us on both sides, if they are bent, then it is passed if it can; and the traction with the plant, and if you see that it is raised with a nail straight small for raising the fracture, and it does not move; and if the fracture is in other parts, such as in the little finger or one of the others, if it is passed, and the piece is with the sound finger that follows; or you tie them all in one hand, whatever is needed, or you pass a nail through, as I have said; and take care in restoration and disposition of the chaperel, and correct what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken bone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the shoulder is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward; the restoration is if it lies in the lines of the fracture and the other does not.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient screams when it happens, then extends each muscle of his limb according to its place; and this is when the fracture occurs in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the shoulder, then some of the muscles are pulled towards the point of pain, and the others are torn away from the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And as it has reached the girdle, and therefore the ligaments of the girdle are relaxed, and the extension is lost; then place the bone in its proper position with both hands, until it is according to its natural form, and then apply the splint, and the bandage, and do not allow it to come out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if it has swelled, and if you allow it to rest, then return to your work and your care; the dressing is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you encircle the ankle with the bandage doubled in size of I to III, and remove any excess, then bend the leg so that the heel reaches the root of the nail, and tie the long end of the string between the thigh and the leg, loosening the girdle of the knee; then bend the leg and the thigh with the bandage, then put on the bandage again, and place an estile on the hip bone of the thigh; then place the leather between the thigh and the hip to fix the strap, then begin to tie three or four turns of the bandage on the knee; and as you add more turns of the bandage, the tighter it gets; then take out the two ends of the string that you have tied between the thigh and the knee, and at the top of the bandage, as you see the pulley, then let it go, and if it does not move from its place, then leave it alone, and if it does not apostime or swell, then it is done.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it happens, if it leaves, and addresses what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, if it can be stopped, then it can; and if not, then it can be cut and drained, and the cure as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is ever broken the hinge when I put in the pins, as we have experienced in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration that has been made, it does not fit well with the joint.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	You should know that the hinge is restored in L years, or less than less, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the right knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the right knee joint there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, if it is not much of a fracture, or a perforation, and comes to all wounds, and feels pain, and that is good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put back what has been separated as much as possible, and then put in the plaster, and then put in an iron rod, if you have it, and draw it as tight as you can, then reward all the dispositions we have made for other fractures, such as aposteme chaut and other like things; and put into each accident what is necessary to make it healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, and some are called on the right side "mustelz" and the others are called "foscile"; and it all breaks like the arm, and therefore the restoration is as well as the arm properly, and the members are all. And if the two bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, then turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bones are broken, then turn as far as possible; and it is seen that there is great pain.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	1. Therefore, ensure proper extension and position it evenly; however, keep in mind that the fracture may be uneven, and it may have more pieces, so the extension should be smaller and lighter; and align it according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. And when you have completed your work, if you take two strips of hair that are purple on one side and green on the other, and are long enough to cover the leg from the knee down to the ankle, then wrap them around the leg and tie them at the knee, and make sure it does not shift to the left or right, and it is well; and no one has caused any pain in the leg, and it was done with a needle, and he put on the leg to prevent movement, and it was properly made in the fracture or wound; and shake each time the leg to see if there is any sign of inflammation or other accident; if the cure is as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fracture of the bone of the wrist
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the wrist are never broken and must be carefully cut, and they have only been cut once in different positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the wrist are broken and you see them pressing on one another, if they seem to be broken on the ground, just like when you walk, then put your hand on the other side, and lift the bone that is lower; then press it as much as it can be in its place; then put the splint and stitch it, and make a small pillow with the other wrist, then pull it towards the elbow, and when you have covered it with cloth, and other things that you know.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the bone is not set, you will find the bones unevenly broken, and dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are two broken bones, if they are repaired as we have said, then on the other one put a splint according to its length; and make a larger wedge, and then tighten the joint that I have described, and the strain; and if there are two or three, or more, broken bones, then on each one put a splint according to its quantity, rolled up in one layer of linen, and tighten the joint opposite the pike of the thigh; and let it be placed under the belly of the thigh so that it is well tied.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	The following sentence should be translated as: "And it is necessary that you do not ignore the other things I have said for other injuries, as soon as we have mentioned them; and treat each accident as necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	The following sentence should be translated as: "of the fracture of the bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The following sentence should be translated as: "If the woman's bone is broken, if it is placed on the side of the neck, then it is held by the hand; then fill the wound with the nature of the cloth, and put it in as much as possible; then bend the woman, and gently lower the back a little at a time, and then jump the cloth, as soon as it comes into the nature, and return the bone with the cloth; and if you see piss, if the cloth is wet, and if it has been wet, put it back in, and then make VII jors or entor: if the fracture is restored, and if you see it, take a bowl of bruises, and tie a cord to the bag, and blow all the bowl into the nature; then squeeze the cord formed, until the bowl is empty: the nature will return to the fracture; then fill it with cloth, and leave it alone for a while, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the bone of the elbow is broken, or in the female, if it is restored as we have said in the elbow of the arm; and these fractures are not hidden that are proximate to that which puts its study and its use, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture means in more ways the right way of restoration: understand the doubt.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the groove, when it is broken, take an ostrich gullet and bite the groove; then wrap around drapes and let it stand for three days or more, and it will be healthy quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of a fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, whether it is the bone of the arm or shoulder, or appearance, that he be healthy now, if the pain we have mentioned testifies to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if the burning of vitriol, if you have nothing else, then resume to restore the fracture at the same hour, or the next day, if the patient does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the patient comes, and the burning of vitriol comes, then leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the burning is calmed, and do not touch it again on the third or fourth day, because you will cause the patient to come by accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken, it should be set as soon as possible, so that you can gently place it at your fingertips, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not easy to make with your fingers, then use this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width should be according to the size of the wound. For this reason, it is necessary to pierce three or four times, according to how many times it is necessary for each treatment of fracture; and it should be sharp and large, so that it does not slip with the compression on the member at your fingertips, and it should also be in front, and large before, and in front:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called "palinthe", because it aims that the heads of the bones be placed on the head of the bone; and the bone once, as long as it rises, and is even, and meets with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is not clear, and the splints cannot well grasp the bone, then it comes that you cover the head of the bone with the splint, as long as the splints have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you do not manage to bring the bone back, as we have said, if it is covered with an instrument suitable for this, or cutting and sharp, then use this which is harder in the bone's roughness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, one should suspect that there is something wrong with its natural joint.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you stretch it too much, then drape it in a piece of black, synthetic leather, and do it properly; and do not put anything on the wound or other places where there is oil, so that it does not cause rotting and corruption; then after resetting the bone, leave the wound open, cover it with a cloth, according to the size of the wound, and make sure the wound is not tightened with the fracture; and many times have I seen this happen, and they have brought it to the patient or died or corrupted never; and the scars are softer and less affected than the others.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	When the wound is large or severe, and you doubt that it will heal, as we have said, and you feel pain in the leg, but cannot put on a bandage; then wrap the leg with cloth, tie it tightly, and apply poultices.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When you see after the first or second day that the wound has healed, if all that you have applied has helped, and you have an ointment for healing wounds, such as a medicinal ointment and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to unwrap the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is swollen and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	It is necessary that the limbs be aligned in a certain way that the belly corresponds lightly to the leg.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If they continue to twist, and it cannot be held but rather moves away from the belly, with small pieces of bones, as if it wants to pull the wound with a tent, and all these pieces displaced that cause this pain, then...
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if an abscess comes to the limb, or in some other way of corruption, and you cure it according to what is written in this chapter before, then...
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed through the limb, if it is like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if it is not treated because many times death comes but it is left as long as it bleeds; by chance it may heal after 20 or 30 years, and then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of brushes that come out of the heat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come many times after the health of the bracelet, moreover when it is near the joint, and the matter to be seen is the figure of the member; and by chance cannot make the member its natural place.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If you are cold: if you administer strengthening medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, and other similar things, either none of these, or all together, and mix them with warm strengthening wine or with plenty of beer or with honey; and then apply them to the wound, and draw it well, and do not let it drip from your hands; and then draw it, and resume another, as long as the swelling is great; or you draw a piece of plaster well made; for the property of the plaster is that it all clots the blood in the members; and if the swelling has turned into hardness, and is becoming like a piercing, and it is bleeding from the wound, then you should cut off any excess; or you leave it on any part that is swollen, as long as it is swollen, and cure it as soon as it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The first sentence to translate is: "ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture is set, and subsides after the weak limbs and soften, if it happens for various reasons: either because one was too tightly bound, and not as it should have been; or because it had too many ligatures, and could not come to the member; or because of excessive inflammation; or because of too many movements at the wrong time; or because there is little blood in the body, and it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is if you make the masseter muscle tense and make the body stiff, as long as it does not multiply in itself; then give a bath, and relax; then put poultice on the limb, if it attracts to the great inflammation, and the swelling often turns green, as the inflammation reaches the member; and realign to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A dislocated limb after a sudden injury.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is swollen after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is distorted, it does not follow its natural course: if one does not believe the folk who say that the bone must be broken all at once, and many have done this in our land; and these fractures cause great harm, and by chance the patient dies; however, if the wounds and torments are fresh, and it is necessary to raise them with hot water, or herbs that soften, as with nettles, and roots, and honey, and similar things; and I apply a softening ointment, as well made as dyaquilon, and take the vismalve muscillaige and cook it with lard or oil of sisament, and apply it thus; or take fat figs and chew them with colon fiber, and similar medicines that dry the urine.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never has been seen a node that is constantly and continuously tightened with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be no movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is awakened and hardened, like a wound, and there is need of the forge, then it comes to pass that the coper meets with the bone, in the subtle incision lightly; and it is necessary to strengthen and study in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs at no joint, it comes to bring sense to the member.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if it is delayed, and by chance it is caught in the joint, and when it is reset, it is often moved to the shoulder; therefore, if it cannot be moved back to its place when it is enlarged: many times come pain and other sufferings; then, as soon as this happens, I make the patient better, then leave it, until the abscess is closed and healed; then warm the member with oil, then reset it gently, and cure each member as well as it was cured in its joint.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the surgeons to treat the dislocations of the shoulder joints.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There are two ways in which the mandibles are dislocated: either they are slightly broken at their bases and become soft; or they are completely dislocated and hang downwards, and the saliva from the mouth cannot be held, and the mouth cannot be closed, and the tongue is wrapped around with the speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	If the dislocation is small, it returns through more positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	If the dislocation is complete and fixed, then it must be reset as soon as possible without force; in such a way that the patient's shoulder joint is marked with the other hand at the root of the mandible dislocating the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands are deformed to make them equal; and command the patient to make the mandibles soft and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the measure is equal, as it is in its place in his shoulder.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is reset gritty, then it is the same as the two mandibles together, if the arrows of hot and oily oil are applied, until they are lightly reset; do not worry about how rough the reset is, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are reset correctly, and the patient's mouth feels very soft, if you apply warm and oily drapes made of oil and wax to the mouth, then gently close it with threads; and let the patient lie on his back, and his head between the two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, and does not force himself to breathe, but eats light meat as long as the pain is steady and does not affect the jaws; and then do what you have gently reset, and do not try to open the mouth with your teeth and tongue, as long as the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be repositioned at once in an hour, and are not converted to their proper positions, then if fevers and customary colds come, and by chance the stomach, and by chance vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then you will know that it is a mistake; and many times died those who came, in nine years.
de la forcelle	of the force.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot be removed from the cost of the continuation of the hand and the foot, and it is never stable at the end, and that is felt by everyone.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is if the patient is able to hold his back straight and extend his arms; then press the shoulder to your palm, and it will return; then place the splint and bandage on it, and tighten; and the joint that is towards the elbow cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is never dislocated, then reset it to the shoulder, as we have said; then place the splint and bandage on it, and tighten, and command the patient to rest as soon as he is healthy; and then you will realign the head of the shoulder when it is able to be removed from its socket.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	The first sentence to translate is "de la dislocation de l’espaule". The translation is 
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The translation of "Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres" is: "Ways to dislocate the shoulder are known in three ways: either it is dislocated at the part of the axlebox at the desoz; or it is dislocated at the part of the pis; or it is dislocated at the part of the sus, and this happens rarely; or it does not dislocate the shoulder from the shoulder, nor does it dislocate the tendons; and more often it dislocates towards the axlebox, nevertheless to those who have little strength, because in this jump it is most helpful; to those who have enough strength, it jumps at points, and returns to points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, it happens to some men that they are struck or castrated, and the arm swells from an abscess, and make sure it is not dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you examine it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And know the dislocations when they are towards the axis, and make a difference between the sick arm and the healthy one, and you will find between them clear differences; and you will find at the top of the arm a hollow, and down the axis to the top of the arm, as if it were some ones; and he cannot bring his hand back to its place, nor move without any movements; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, if it is not hidden, because you can see it clearly at the top; and this way of dislocation is not far to bring back, when it is new, or if it is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The manner is that the nurse gently places her hand on the shoulder of the patient, then removes your hands from the wound, and gently releases the joint at the top of the shoulder; the nurse then gently places her hand there, extends it upwards, and places it above, if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in our hands shortly after, then it is that the patient should be bathed in warm water; the wound will be softened and soothed, as with a decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in warm water, and it will become soft; then the patient is wrapped on his back, and a piece of linen is placed on the wound, not too soft nor too hard, then the foot of the patient is placed on the linen, and the shoulder is gently lifted by the hand of the nurse, and the muscles of the shoulder are eased; other nurses may trace the shoulder with their finger to see if it does not move; this shoulder now returns, and if you see that it is presented in this way: and that you make present to the patient a larger shield than the nurse's hand; then the shield should be placed on the shoulder of the patient, and the shoulder should be lifted up, so that the nurse's hand hangs down towards the belly; other nurses may trace the shoulder with their hand towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak, if there is nothing heavy that can be done with them, then the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the reduction can also be done in another way: and it is like finding a long tusk in the ground, whose head is also returned as if it were a pistol; then it is placed on the patient's shoulder, but if it is not too large or too heavy; then the shoulder is extended from the other side, forming the joint again; and if it does not return to its place for all these things that we have said, then this treatment must be done: take a tusk of two fingers in length and four in width, which has its root enter into the palm of the hand from behind the shoulder, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie the head of the wrist that was not bent by the maid, then place it in the palm of the maid; and extend some arms over the long wrist, and the helper over the shoulder of the arm, then put the arm over the elbow of an arrow, and extend the hands on the other side, and let the chest hang down from another part: the joint was now straightened.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done as it should be, if you must place the palm of your hand on a smooth thread, then place a pinch of flour with incense and wool on all the shoulder and ribs, then tighten the knot on the palm, and turn the linen on the pinch, and wrap your hand around the collar, and let the hands remain still.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he drinks little at first, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it heals faster; and then drink more after the years or weeks, and move it; and if it is tight and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is loose due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, it comes that you must administer cautery at three pulses, as it is placed before or in the chapter of cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do everything, and after seven weeks, the joint does not hold, and cannot lift the arm forward, then you should know that the nerve at the shoulder of the deltoid is compressed or extended or softened; and know that the joint will never snap in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The first line of the text translates to: "The dislocation that is towards the pus, and the limbs, or the buttocks, if it is made by impulse and stretching of hands, and it is treated another time; and it is cured as soon as it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing, if there is pain in the limb, and later movement, if the patient uses warm baths many times, as long as the pain is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dear dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	The joint that is dear is weakened at points, and the points return; and it becomes weakened from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not well repaired because it is seen and felt clearly; and it becomes weakened according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	When you join the male member with your hand, if you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	However, the joint is narrow, and cannot touch the arm or the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it always with the help of forceps, because if it is not reset with forceps, it would be very painful to return; and unfortunately, it cannot be returned at all, even when it is in its place; therefore, it is worse than other dislocations, and causes great pain, and by chance, it can lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it is in place, you can return it with your hand; and the arms should be expanded, and the hands should be pulled towards the elbow, opposite and opposite, and the joint should be adjusted to the roots of the palm, as it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when it doubles its hand on its hand, and proud of the root of the palm leaf that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to the shoulder, then apply strong extension; and if two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move at extension; then turn the arm in each part, then make a double long and wide cloth strip; and when the joint is at the hand, if no oil can smooth the joint, then force the joint to form, as it revives; and when it reaches the shoulder, put a dry bandage with a piece of beef dough on it, and form the arm at the collar of the maimed shoulder, and leave some thumbs, then let it go.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	When the joint is firmly closed in its place, if it is loose, and it is left; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then re-apply the splint and the bandage, and leave it for some time until it is firmly set; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the dislocation of the joint, and it becomes still, if it is bathed and rubbed gently, and pressed until it is calmed; or you put on the joint a fat sheep's wool, then leave it for an hour and a night, then the bone, and let it enter or bath; and when it comes out, rub the joint firmly, then put the wool back on, and then enter or bath; and do it twice or three times until it is healthy; and if you see, if you put on fat sheep's wool that has been bathed and rubbed with butter, and wrapped around it; if it returns to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The first sentence to translate is "li dislocation de la main".
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The first sentence to translate is "li jointure de la main desalue". It means "the dislocation of the hand joint". The second sentence, "et li revenue est legiere" means "and the return is lighter", indicating that the dislocation is not as severe as others. The third sentence, "Plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie" means "more than other joints", emphasizing the severity of the hand dislocation. The fourth sentence, "il la covant ramener au leu hastanment" means "it is necessary to return it to the shoulder as soon as possible". The fifth sentence, "en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee" means "in the same place where it was dislocated", indicating that the dislocation should be reset in the same
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resettings if you place the hand in a table and extend the fingers, and measure the hand, then put your thumb on the appearance of the joint, and pull it as it reappears, you must make sure that it is well in the shoulder; then place the dislocated hand on the table with extended fingers for resetting and measuring.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient should place their hand on top of their arm on the table, and they should look to see how the joint appears.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good. If not, then the patient should continue with soothing applications and if they leave it alone, they can try to start again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if they cannot bear it, and you cannot put the jointed finger back in the palm after any time, then the joint will not be set properly; and do not doubt that as long as the hand is inflamed, and nothing can be strained on it, then the nerve or artery is damaged, if there is no other remedy but fire cautery, and by chance it may be another thing.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hands are at the shoulder, if they are placed on the probe that we have mentioned, then it is stretched and left for a while, then it is removed and left alone.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no swelling, then the hot mallow and the rub as soon as it is clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	No time is dislocated the hand once, no time on the back of the palm or stomach; therefore, it is held, and the dislocation is bent in your hands as it returns, then hold the chief of the dislocated hand, and put it to the part where it is dislocated; and leave it for a while, and then put it again in place, and from the knee, if as we have said, and the dislocated joint is moved and tied, and made firm; and this is done often, as soon as it is tightened, and if it is dislocated at the back of the hand, and done as before, when it is clean; and so is done, whenever it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Dislocation of the shoulder joint
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder joint of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are more dislocations, if there is no treatment, because the patient dies.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And if the patient feels like jumping, and cannot hold on, and many times the body parts are softened, or the hips or arm or shoulder, or if the shoulder is always quiet at IV degrees; that which is quiet in the back is called "girdle tightness": the cure is that you reward if the girdle tightness has come from childhood: if there is no care or cure and salvation for all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	The first sentence translates to: "And the one that comes from chopping or drilling or similar things, they call it ancient methods of healing by great words, but it has no real benefit; but I have briefly summarized according to my intention and formed bandages in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gallbladder that comes before, there is no health or sickness; and those that come directly in the second costal arch, and can be cured only by the one that comes to the back, as I say; and that the surgeon should extend his hand over the face in the first league equally, and has no strain on it, so it does not bend; then he forms the tissue in the ground for the first part, and the other as piez, and makes a line through the surgeon's nails, and the other as hainches, and as chevilles; and two ministers fasten the lines, one at the chief and the others as piez, among the II tisons; and they should be well closed, the tison as we have said, and the surgeon puts his hands on the spine forming, as it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it does not return through this treatment, then take a third arm of long bone, cut off the end, and the patient should be in costé, and pull the head of the saw off the end, then put the mileu of the saw on the spine; and put the eyes of the mileu on the other end of the saw, and press well, as it returns to the leu; and if you see, then do the same for the tornet that turns in the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And is it that you have two ties at the head of the patient's bone of an arm of great length, and turn the eyes to two others, and there should be a thumb of long bone between each tie, cut away and cut off, a bunch of spits of long bone; and there should be a tie in each, either the tornet turns, and they should be the ties firmly in the earth, if they do not move; and between each tie there should be one turning, even if the tornets turn, and there should be two small ties of long bone for each turning of the tornet, to turn the tornet; and then the lien which is among the fasteners of the tornet towards the head, and the other lien towards the eyes of the other tornet, and each of the ministers turns its tornet at all the lien, and the masters put the spine equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When the joint is equalized, if it is dried with a desiccant powder in abundance, and then washed, and then the ointment of a tablet of III doses, which stains the gilbertite and the healthy part of the spine, and then tied with a ribbon as we have said, and used subtle salves of norrissement, until it is healed; and nothing comes to the end of health, if it comes to administer soothing and softening medicines with the ointment we have mentioned before; and never once does one give a piece of plaster, and never once does one appear in the back of the spine that is curved, and make sure that this is not dislocation; and this is the bone that opens, for one must not have too much confidence: by chance it could come to death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of joints of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Only the shoulder joints and the shoulder blade joints are dislocated, unlike other joints; and the shoulder joint is dislocated in four parts: front and back, and top and bottom; and more front, and less back, and less top and bottom.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of how much the shoulder is dislocated is that when the bad leg is joint with the good one, it is longer and more open, and the bad knee is wider than the good one, and it cannot double its knee at the fire; and it is the one who is shortened in aposteme chaut because the head of the hip comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who comes to the surgery, if this accident is contrary to these fronts.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of him who came to the front, if it is well his leg according to the accomplishment; never, do not double the genital with pain, and if you see it happening before, if it cannot before, and retains his urine, and enflames the anus, and when it comes, if passes under the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him who came to the rear, if it is that he cannot expand his genital, and double, and this leg is more tortured than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the shoulder is raised, and the costals are lowered.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	1. The first sentence to translate: "Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, there are four ways to reset it: if you manage to return the joint, and it becomes soft and flaccid, and the limb is straightened out and bent; by chance if it returns, and there is no other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, then it may be necessary to use a strong minister to straighten the leg, either with two hands or with the leg that is closest to the joint; and other ministers extend their hand in this manner that they pull their hands away from their thighs, then they stretch the leg along the thigh; and they also tie the thigh with a cord; and they extend it both forward and backward as long as the patient is lifted off the ground once, and does not hang down.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common in IV cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then it is necessary to treat the case If the dislocation occurs in the jaw, then it is necessary to put the patient on his side with his healthy chest, then tie the bandage at the root of the tooth, and the limb that is lax, then tighten the bandage towards the angle and towards the force; then apply a few more measures to the patient's arms, and wrap the largest limb of the broken jaw with a bandage, and extend it over the heel: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is gentler than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	1. If you do not hold the shoulder in this manner as we have said, then it comes to pass that you feel the two feet of the maimed person assembled at a very tight knot on the two ankles, and on the two thighs; and the maimed leg is extended twice as much as the other. Then it is hung suspended from the head of a post, and the two arms are laid down on the ground; then command the minister to embrace the head of the stool, and other ministers hanging with the maimed person, who embrace form the stool, because the joint now returns in a straight manner.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	2. If the dislocation is at its full extent, if the maimed person grips it as we have said in the one who has been hobbled, and tightens the knot on the maimed leg properly and the ankle; then tie the thongs, the head and the other at the legs of the maimed person, and plant the thongs between the maimed person's limbs in the form of a dislocation; and cover them with wet cloths so that they do not hurt the maimed person, then extend each minister towards him, and the maimed person holds it equally in his hand with the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on the table and press as we have said in the gilbositeit, and give the patient the necessary medicine on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, if it is necessary to extend the painful leg strongly, as I have said; and then place the patient's hand on the painful knee, and pull back towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, if it cannot be extended the leg backward, do not get up from the ground, as we have said for the hips; and place your hand on your face, and extend the limb as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table; and when the leg is extended, it will be equal; then bend the knees, and insert the splint, and hold with a bandage, if the knee does not move; and rest for three or four hours, then remove the splint, and see if the legs are equal, if the stretch, as we have said before, and let it remain for three or four hours; then remove the bandage, and send the patient home when the limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the shoulder dislocation of the first kind
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it should be pulled downwards and backwards, and not from the front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and it does not bend at the knee, then it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient right, and extend the leg if possible, and put your back on your heel, and put your foot on your thighs; then take the shoulder with your hands, and stretch between your two fingers, and bend the two thumbs that form the first part of the shoulder; and other means extend the foot, as long as the shoulder returns to its place, and the signs are that the knee is slightly bent; and apply the plaster, and make the leg bend at the knee, and assemble the fingers firmly three or four times, then release it; and do not move the patient's limbs too much until they are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not present, if there is extension of the limb, as we have said in the treatment of the gout, as soon as it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the big toe
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The big toe is never used, and it is never completely dislocated, and it is often damaged and deformed.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is that if the ankle is swollen, and it should be examined before the part where it is dislocated: the remedies are light, and they should be extended gently with the hands as soon as it is only available.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, if you should place the ankle straight in the right position, and hold it with your hand by the knee, and then pull the foot to you with your left hand, and then with your right hand, and raise it twice, and then place it back on your thumb; and do this twice, as we have said, with a gentle touch and raising the foot; if it returns, it is well; if not, if it does not return, you must repeat the dislocation, for it will return; and if it cannot return, you should place the ankle on its back against the ground, and hold the knee firmly on the ground between the knees, and draw the leg outwards so that the ankle does not bleed; then mark the ministers with your thumb, and extend the foot to your hands or to the other hand, where it is at the top of the ankle; then extend all the ministers equally, and the passenger should be held between the knees of the ankle; then extend each minister equally, and the passenger should be held between the knees of the ankle to hold the ankle in place; then place the dislocation in your hands, and mark the healthy leg at the other end, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	When it reaches the point, if it is plastered and allowed to dry, and forms, and the bandage is tied around the leg, and warded the nerves that are under the ankle bone, so as not to be too tight; then it is left on for two or three days, and if it remains tight, then it is loosened; then it is removed at the end of the fourth or fifth day, and the patient is given instructions to change the bandage every four days. If it is still tight, it is loosened again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If abscesses form, and if they come, then it is necessary to relax them, as we have said before, as long as they are healthy.
des dois	Of two things, one is that the
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	If the two are dislocated, if they are managed well, and it is a light thing to extend the sense of work.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocations are in no pain or strain, then it is best to make the patient lie on his back or on his side, and place your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot until it returns; and when it is equalized, and there is no opening, then place the sole of your foot on the patient's shoulder blade, and form the foot, and let it stay for three hours, then remove it; and then rest, as long as it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, often the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in your treatment, if you are not ignorant or cruel and slow, and if you are compassionate and merciful and tardy, do not be proud; and begin with calming measures for the wound, and let the patient hold the hand of God; when you see hope for health, reset the limb to the shoulder, unless the wound bleeds and moves; when the limb is at the shoulder, if the wound is calmed and treated, and the pain is lessened, as it should be in simple diseases, and if there is a fracture with the dislocation, and the bones are broken, do what we have said in simple diseases; and do not enter into a state of despair, according to what we have said, for this is according to your creator's will, and for the wisdom of your heart.
Amen	1. For the fire c
