O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and have made the end through its explanations and its interpretations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is very rare in our region and is greatly diminished throughout, therefore the science has been lost and scattered, and there remains nothing of it but small descriptions in books that have been moved by hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	"And from this comes error and vanity, and minds are closed and knowledge is neglected."
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	"I believe that I want to revive this work together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the irons of cautery and other tools of the work with the arrangement of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary."
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	"And because there are no good surgeons found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected."
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	"And it is necessary for someone who practices this to climb up in the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so that they know the judgment of limbs and their forms, joints, separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of bones, movements and veins moving and resting, and where they exit."
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	"And therefore Hippocrates said that a name without a deed is much, but with a deed it is little; and the same goes for the art of surgery."
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	"We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before should guard himself so that he does not fall into error and kill people, just as I have seen many times those who practice this science abandoning their knowledge and experience."
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	"For I saw a foolish physician who cut off one aposteme of scrofula from the neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries of her neck; so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands."
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	"And I saw another physician who extracted a stone from the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; so he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died three days later."
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	"And I had already been called for to remove it, and I saw the condition of the sick man and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if they cut him he would die."
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	"And I saw another physician who took in charge one of our dukes who had his leg broken and wounded at the same time, and this physician, full of ignorance, tied the break on top of the wound with strong bandages, without leaving any ointment on the wound, and he left him like that for a period. And he commanded that it should not be untied, and it remained like that until the leg was completely swollen and the foot rotted away."
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	"I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come and untie his leg, and when I had it loosened, he was at peace and felt no pain."
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	"But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not save it. And the corruption did not stop going through the member until the whole limb was lost."
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	"And I saw another physician who burst an inflamed aposteme and then cauterized it with the malice of his ignorance."
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	"For a chancre, when it is purified of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron if it cannot be completely excised in that place."
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	"And therefore, dear son, you should know that the art of surgery is divided into two parts: one where there is danger in many dispositions. And I will show in each place in this book where there is fear and danger."
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Why you must guard yourself so that foolish physicians cannot speak ill of you Take up your weapons in haste And undertake your patients lightly and firmly And use the best way so that by God's grace you may attain salvation and be praised Leave fearful diseases to severe healing And cast aside your weapons from those who cause doubt And have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the next in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his instructions: "Do not take on serious illnesses unless you wish to be called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	"The first chapter is about cauteries of fire and cauteries of hot medicine, and it is arranged from the head down to the feet. And about the forms of instruments, and about the iron tools for cauterizing, and everything that is necessary in this work."
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	"The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about extracting splinters, and similar things. And it is arranged with the forms of instruments."
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	"The third chapter is about reducing dislocations and sprains, and similar things. And it is arranged from the head down to the feet, with the forms of instruments."
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	"Before we begin our discussion on surgery, it is necessary that I explain the quality of each humor and its harmful effects."
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	"I say that the qualities of the humors and their harmful effects are the longest speech and most subtle science and secret replies. And many wise men spoke about this and agreed on it. But I will be brief because I fear lengthiness."
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	"I say that cautery is useful for all humors where there is matter, except for two types of humor: hot and dry humor without matter."
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	"Some said that in hot and dry humor together with matter, cautery is greatly helpful. And others said the opposite: that cautery is not useful for an illness that comes from heat and dryness."
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	"For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat hot illnesses with heat or dryness. And he who says the opposite argues that cautery greatly helps hot and dry illnesses that occur in the body."
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	"For when you compare the body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body cold."
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	"And I agree with this statement."
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	"For I have found it true through experience."
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	"And anyway, let no one meddle with it except those who have tried it and know the art of cautery through long experience, and who know the diversity of humors in humans, their dispositions, causes of illnesses, seasons, and ages. We are not afraid of other humors, especially cold and moist ones."
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	"And all physicians agreed and concurred about cautery."
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	"And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of healing, and has greater effectiveness than cautery with hot medicine."
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	"For fire is simple, and it only comes to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members if there are none."
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Hot medicines travel from limb to limb in burning and cause serious diseases in the limbs. Sometimes they kill the patient because of their heat and goodness unless there is an excess present.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	"And this I have found through experience and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things. And for this reason, I apologize for the length of my speech, as I do not wish to deprive you of the secret that is concealed in fire, nor its quality and how it overcomes illnesses of the body, as philosophers demonstrate. Now receive these thoughts."
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	"And know, son, that they agreed on when cauteries should be performed, and chose appropriate seasons."
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	"And I say that cauterization is necessary at all times, because the harm that arises is kept beneath it with the aid of cauterization; and especially if cauterizations are for painful wounds which cannot wait until greater evil comes to the limb."
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	"And do not think, dear child, as foolish doctors do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no relapse; and they say it thus: but it is not so as they believe, because cauterizations are not medicine which changes complexion, and dries up the humors which cause pain, and is worth more than medicine for its swiftness in value and power in working."
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	"And it sometimes happens that diseases come according to the complexion of the sick person and the location of the disease and its strength; and superfluities are gathered in him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are applied where there is little excess and moisture, such as dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return often; but this happens rarely."
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	"And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth anything after medicines, their intentions are false, and cauterizations are the last resort of medicine because when we apply remedies for any disease and they do not work, then we apply cauterization, and it is effective."
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	"Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors."
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	"The ancients said that cauterizations with instruments of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its high substance. They also said that the place of cauterization does not cause corruption, but this is not true, for I have proven it and found that it is true in some people. And cauterizations with gold are more effective than those with iron, as they said."
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	"And even so, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how hot it is by the color of the gold, and it quickly cools down. And if one heats it too much, it melts in the fire, and thus there are many obstacles."
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	"And for these reasons we use iron cauteries that we have better equipped for our work."
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	"Now I have arranged this chapter from beginning to end so that the way may be easier to find."
dou cautere olivaire	"About the olive cautery"
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	**Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil:** This cautery is useful for dampness and cold affecting the brain.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	"The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine moistening the head for three or four nights, according to what the strength, age, and constitution of the patient can withstand; then make heat behind the patient's head."
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	"And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his knees; afterwards put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your middle fingers meet, there should he be cauterized with the 'olive-shaped' cautery, of which this is the form:"
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And place him on the line marked with ink, and make in descending and squeezing motion little by little while turning your hand; then lift your hand gently, and look at the bone if you see it a little bit; and if you do not see it, then start cauterizing again until you see the bone as I told you; afterwards take a little bit of wax, and put in woven and soft cotton inside, and place it on the wound, and let it stay for three days; afterwards put on clean cloth moistened in butter; and leave it on until the burn is healed; afterwards heal the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmacon' until it is healed."
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	"And the ancient ones said that when the wound stays open longer, it purges more; and therefore they encourage more wounds."
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	"And some of them said that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burnt; then remove what is burnt from the bone and heal it."
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	"And others say that one should leave the cautery on and press it so hard as to abate of the bone about as wide as a thread that women put in their spindles so that the humors may flow out more freely; and the wound should be kept open for a long time; afterwards, it should be healed and dressed."
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	"And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be entirely good in all cases except perhaps for some men who are fearful; and I believe that one should leave it alone because the flesh is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we see in other members. And likewise when the flesh of the sick person is weak by nature, the first sign of cauterization is more saving and beneficial for me, and with this method I currently work together safely."
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	"About the ancient pain in the head"
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	"When there comes chronic pain in the whole head that lasts a long time, the sick person should use remedies and pills called 'cochiae', and also purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters. And if one does the cautery that we have mentioned earlier, it is not effective."
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	"Be careful if the flesh of the sick person is strong by nature and not too cold. In that case, cauterize with a little bit of the cautery that we have mentioned earlier."
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	"Afterwards, make cauteries on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called 'vessels'; this is the place where cupping glasses are put. And lift your hand so that you do not see the bone: the sick person feels much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be more subtle than those used for the middle of the head, and here is the form:"
dou cautere dou chief	"About the cautery of the head"
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head,
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The fire cautery is thus: you take a fig branch and remove its bark, chopping it into two pieces at the joints. Then make an incision on the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can place the fig branch underneath the skin; and when it is placed, bind it tightly and leave it like that for twelve hours; then untie it and draw out the fig branch, leaving the wound thus for two or three days. Then apply cotton soaked in butter until it seeps out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the application of ointment, as long as it is healthy; and if you see fit to use any of the burning medications that I have written about in the second treatise on burning medications.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery follows this manner
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which this is the shape
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and is called "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a claw with a little curve, and in the middle has a small appearance. And put it on the painful area, and hold your hand so that you turn the fire lightly until half of the edge of the heart is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and let an abundance of blood flow out
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After that, put cotton on wool thread, and place it on the wound for three days; then put cotton soaked in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healthy. And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at its entire point, be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	Of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries mentioned earlier with medicine or iron do not suffice, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white. Then, swiftly place it on the painful area along a line half as long as two fingers, and lift your hand once, ensuring that you do not cut the artery and that you do not go right down to the bone; be careful of the mandible which moves when chewing, and ensure that the nerve does not look back so that the mandible does not spasm and cause discomfort, especially for someone who is not used to it and has no experience; leave the wound open in the middle. But I will tell you how blood is restrained when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it pertains to in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness and the patient is suffering, then cauterize him on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed. And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; this cautery is better and more helpful than the other one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of earache caused by cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and various solvent medicines have been applied and other treatments as mentioned earlier in this division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "pointe", of which here is the shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After making ten points all around the painful ear, or around both ears if the pain is in both, and then moving away a little from the root of the ear where you have made the sign, and having made ten points around each ear, then treat the wound until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of mouth ulceration
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Ulcers that must be treated by cautery are only those which move pus, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses. Do not perform cauteries on similar ulcers which come from heat and inflammation of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this ulcer which secretes pus from the ears and from evacuations of the head and gargarisms, and these do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little way out from the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; place the cautery on the healthy part that opens up, and make the cautery just above the head of the ear a little below the ear lobe, and another one in the temple as long as a pea; leave the cautery there until half of it is burnt; this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the shape of the cautery that we have mentioned earlier, but it is a little more subtle and the blade should be a little thicker. After making the cautery, treat the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said before, but there is no improvement and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the spot called "vessels" as we have mentioned earlier, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	Of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large drinks and pills made from powdered mallow seeds for the brain. After that, raise the head of the patient entirely, and place on the occiput the plaster of mustard which is written about in the treatise on plasters; this is the manner of cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy thus, good; and if it isn't, apply three cauteries around the head descending to the neck with a space of two fingers between each cautery; and treat it as the others, and if you see it joining, and the patient bears it, apply one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more above the two horns, and treat until it is healthy; and let the cautery called "olivare" be used, as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head must be cleansed of years and the things that we have said before; then raise the head of the patient, then apply a cautery around the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the nape of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient bears it, and the disease is strong, apply four cauteries on the back; and leave it until the most of the heart is burned, then remove your hand; then treat until it is healthy, and let the cautery called "olivare" that we have said before be used.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should only use the bloodletting cautery that is phlegmatic in nature, and it is first necessary to cleanse the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the section when the patient is large and able to withstand taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot withstand it, perform gargling and chewing to cleanse the brain often with good foods; then raise the head in the middle, and apply one cautery according to what we have said before, and one on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and bears it, apply cauteries as I have said for those who have paralysis and flaccidity of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, apply one subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When excesses or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm are present due to melancholy, then apply the cautery with small cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if excesses tend towards melancholy due to the cause of melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raise the patient's head; after make one bandage of fine linen, like a circle, and put it on his head; and the patient sits crossed-legged, and is held well from all sides; after present the lint, and warm with old sheep butter; and when heated by fire temperately, so that the forehead can withstand it; after empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with good governance, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see cauterization being done, make several holes all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the head more greatly; then place cotton wet in butter and chicken fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of the awe of eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first comes upon the eyes due to the signs I have mentioned, then begin and give the patient something cleansing the head, and ward off all dampness, and make him sweat or take many baths fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to raise his head, and makes a cautery on the head, and makes two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of awe is on both eyes together, or one if it is on one; and cut away with all the cautery all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and take care of decorrement of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stay it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision of cauterization how you should perform it; and sometimes one makes a cautery or cutting below the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	Of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins or near the arteries that appear on the outside of the head, and one sees that they are cold humid superfluities, then make the cautery as I have said at the beginning of awe descending upon the eyes: one cautery on the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries on the hatchel below the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize sanguely above the eyebrow with many small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Of the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three nights of cooked cocks' broth. Then raise his head, and make a cautery on the middle of the cautery olive; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the eyebrows; and be careful not to cut the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivary.
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the shape
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see fit to make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not let your hand rest there except until about one-third of the membrane is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Of the hair that points out the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes turns inward and points at the eye, and one makes cauteries in two ways: either by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even. If they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then have the patient lie down on their back. After that, draw a figure on the paper of the eyes resembling the shape of the palm of one's hand, with the beginning of the mark near the hairs; then place moistened cotton in egg white and powdered myrrh on the eye, then heat the cautery which has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cauterize little by little many times along the figure you have drawn until the skin is burned in that place. The sign of success is when you see the paper recede and the hairs stand upright at the point of the eye. Then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then apply moistened cotton with butter until the burning is gone; afterward dress with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterward the hairs come back and the paper is softened again then begin the cautery anew in that same place as you did at first; but if the hairs have fallen out, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of the burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even. Then make parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take three parts each of French soap and live wax, grind them together well, and do it quickly so that it does not cool. Then spread it on the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and place it on the paper of the eyes. And if the patient holds only one eye, then work in one, and if both, then both also. And place moistened cotton in egg yolk under the eye. And let the patient's flesh be on your hand, and put your two fingers pressing on the medicine, and press gently each time that the patient feels a bite of the medicine, for they feel the bite like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the cauterization is complete, then lift up the skin's surface, and see if the paper rises as if it were lifted by fire's constraint or by incision; if so, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply the medicine again on the surface where it has not opened until your work is equal and your eyes are focused; then place cotton wet in butter until the burn cools, afterwards cleanse the skin's surface with the ointment called "diaphoresis" and others until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to guard carefully against your work, take great care that it does not fall into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then begin the cautery again on that spot softened by the same paper, just as you did before; then continue the treatment until it is healed. This is the method of the mirror's bellows.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and littleness, and according to that let your constraints be; and do not reply the straight way to him who is engaged in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	de la cure de fistule par cautere
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary for you to perform a cautery on it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to put their head in your hand. Then hold the patient's head between your hands so that they do not move or turn their head. Then place moistened cotton in egg yolk or in juice of parsley on the eye. Afterward heat the cautery which is shaped like this: and is pointed at the top like a roof tile, altogether the cautery should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see it should be as long as the length of the cautery. But anyway, this one that is pointed will serve better for your purpose.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterward press the fistula if it is open and draw out the corruption and dry it. And if it is closed then open it and draw out from its side. Afterward put on the heated cautery strongly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nose above the eye so that your hand does not make a mistake; then place the cautery in the fat of the eye and burn it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If at the beginning of the cautery you reach down to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then begin the cautery again once more, and if necessary repeat it twice, leaving it for three days. Afterwards, put moist cotton in butter on it, and continue with the healing ointment until it is healed. And if after forty days it has not healed, apply a corrosive hot medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow what is written according to this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cauterizing a fistula which some of the ancients spoke about.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand a fistula and open it up; afterwards put into the opening a subtle little cone such as this is the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make it of the quantity of three grains of pitch. And hold your hand on the camel's hair brush firmly and do not let the patient move their nose so that the melted pitch does not run into their eye. And it is necessary to place moistened cotton with egg yolk or water on the patient's eye. The pitch then burns in the place of the fistula, and heals it by marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have spoken of, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it becomes necessary to administer a hole to the nose and bring the fistula back into its proper place within the nostril.
des crevaices en levres	de las fisuras en los labios
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur on lips called "hairs," especially on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the chapters above and the treatment does not help, then apply one small cauterizing iron according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly in those cracks until it reaches the flesh; afterward, dress the area with wax until it is clean.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the boil on the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When a boil appears at the root of the throat or tonsil, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and it causes putrefaction and rot and becomes filled with pus and forms a fistula; and you treat it as we have described in the chapters above but it does not improve: then you must have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterward, open the opening or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and on the back side of the area; and do this once or twice, after that treat it with what we have described above until it is clean; and if it is cured in this way, then it is good; but if not, then you must uncover the area and remove the rotted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	on tooth mobility
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but they do not help, then place the patient's head in your hand; afterward heat the cautery whose form will come hereafter in this manner so that you place a tube on the tooth; and put hot coals inside the cautery quickly, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; afterward remove your hand and begin the cautery according to your desire; afterward have the patient fill their mouth with salted water, and let them keep it for an hour and spit it out forcefully.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gum becomes constrained, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	from toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from coldness, whether it is visible or hidden, and remedies with medicine do not help, then there must be cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is done thus: take virgin butter and place it on the tip of an iron or brass spoon; afterward take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent stake, and dip it in boiling butter, and quickly place it on the aching tooth until it cools; do this often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see that wetting the wool and cotton in cold butter does not help, then place an iron on hot coals until the fire reaches the cheek of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery by fire should be such that you take an iron or brass cane and make it thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; afterwards heat the cautery, the shape of which will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled down; do this often for the pain will be relieved on the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery and then wipes it off; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery of whichever head you want, according to what you have power to do; and here is the form of the rod:
des scrophules	Scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula are hot and of cold moistures, and not yielding to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery hair remover which follows here with two openings for smoke to exit from the other part of the cautery; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to its quantity and leave it for three days; then put moistened cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the area with ointments and dressings until it is clean.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the candle:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moistures prevail upon the channels of the lungs, especially when it is due to cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be made void first by dissolving medicines; afterwards make a cautery at the root of the throat, ensuring you do not come close to the throat itself and only slightly touch the skin.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards perform another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cautery used be that called "clavile" for which we have the shape before; and heal the place as we have said earlier until it is clean.
de la toust	de la toux
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and every disease of the lung are of cold moistures, and the patient has neither fever nor heat, and the disease is ancient, then perform two cauteries on the chest in its hollow places; and another cautery within the breast between the two breasts; and let the cautery that is called "clavile" be according to the form mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, perform cautery by pricking all around with the cautery called "poins" for which the shape is shown before in the disease of the ears; and let there be thirty or so points, or as many as necessary.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards heal the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be three fingers wide according to this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because the cauteries are lighter thus, you make them three together at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder blade is dislocated due to moisture and it is put back in place but cannot remain there and returns constantly with even small movements, as we have experienced, then it is necessary that you first reduce the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards have the patient lie on their back and side; afterwards lift the heart that is inside the titillite with the fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery that has two inches with this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the side, and let the figure of the cautery come together with four cauteries; and because this is done with the cautery that has three inches, therefore there are six figures of cauterization; and they are according to the fineness of a thread, and this is the form of the cautery that has three inches:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is added onto one nerve, therefore there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards put on a poultice of bruised lentils with salt; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move their limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, which happens rarely, then perform cautery on the thickness of the cautery clavile, or many pricking cauteries.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For once the joint is closed and the moisture removed, the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach causing it to stray from its nature, and catarrh is multiplied in him, and despite usual treatments he derives no benefit, then the patient must be turned onto his back, extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	For this, do as follows: make three cauteries on the inside of the armpit near the elbow with the quantity of two fingers' width, each cautery should be made like a key, and two cauteries outside the two sides such that the figure of the cauteries forms three angles, and there is enough space between them so they do not join together when they fester; and the cauteries should be deep enough to reach both parts of the heart, and the figure of the cauteries should follow this form without adding or reducing.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that a large cautery is necessary in the stomach according to this form, and whoever fears this cautery should make a small prick and press on the stomach for one point according to the quantity you need to do; then cauterize the whole cautery which is called "the point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment that we have spoken of before has been completed, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver causes pain due to coldness and moisture and excess wind, so much that it is severely changed from its natural complexion by superfluities; and if the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, but does not improve, then the patient should be placed on his back on his bed. Sign of this is three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the ribs come together; and let there be the thickness of two fingers between each cautery; and let the cautery be long enough for the body, and do not press too much with your hand throughout the cautery. Burn only half the length of a finger, and let the patient lie on his right side on his feet. If he cannot do this, then let him lie down on his back and stretch out his legs, raising his arms. This is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you have the ability to do so, cauterize these cauteries with the scalpel, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn all of the heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and let it not come close to an artery, for the heart is very subtle there, and especially at the root.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess in the liver,
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment is performed by the physicians, so it is necessary that the patient lies on their back; and then seize with a cloth the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, of which here is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the heart is burned, and come up to the syphac, until all the pores are entirely opened; afterwards treat according to the treatment of the veins until it is healed; and indeed only those who have long studied in the art of medicine should use this cautery, by whom many such diseases have been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	So then he can bravely operate, although it seems to me that it would be better for him to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should perform for pleurisy cauteries of roots of artichokes, and in this manner: take a root of artichoke, the largest that you can find, dry and as thick and long as your fingers; and moisten it in oil, and heat it in the fire, and perform one cautery between the navel and the neck, and two small cauteries a little way down in the part that is under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning back a little; and one cautery in the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the sides of the breast away from the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it openly, just as one does when smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient authors said that someone used a cautery like a razor, heated it and placed it between the ribs until it reached that abscess; and immediately the pain ceased, as we have mentioned regarding the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse with the methods that we have said under the division of cures, and it is not helpful, then there are three ways of cautery that are all good:
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these, one manner is such that you make three or four cauteries, aligning them according to the length of the mouse (back), following the figure of the liver cautery we mentioned earlier; and do not rush your hand through the entire cautery, and have the patient lie on their back; and another manner of cautery is such that you heat the cautery which has two nereids (embers), as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is near the mouse (back), where the rib of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Afterwards, place the two burning embers there until the heart is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you wish, cauterize with three embers throughout the entire cautery.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After treatment when gangrene has been expelled after a long time, this is better than any of the other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	Dropsey
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not useful for dropsy except in the manner called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help at all, then you must perform four cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the navel, two behind the back over the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cauteries be close to the heart's surface.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards leave the cautery open for expelling putrefaction over a long time, and do not neglect the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and both intentions will be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is like the key that we have shown before; and those for the back are olive-shaped, according to what has been shown above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in someone with dropsy and filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; lift your hand along with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go too deep into the flesh, lest the yellow water escape, and let the cautery be according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the shin bone; and let one cautery be below the knee in front and the other behind it on the back of the leg; and leave the cauteries on for a long time without dressing until the water comes out, afterwards cleanse with the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the dismemberment
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the humor of the belly comes from coldness and moisture so that the retaining virtue and digestion which is in the stomach and intestines is weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the sick person well suffering and of strong virtue, then make one great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery of the stomach, around the navel cautery; and four cauteries around the mouth subtly at each one cautery clavicle subtilly, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the humors abundant and the sick person suffering, make a cautery on the point of the hip, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the great one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are at the fundament, one or several, and are old and large cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in sections, but there is no benefit from it, then apply cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is directly below the neck, poked bit by bit in a triangular shape; two under the buttocks; and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swell up, then put one large cautery on the stomach as it is said before, and another on the liver, and another on the navel at the center of all the cauteries; leave the cautery on for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating, cleanse the wound until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshy growth called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut a vein, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it burning on the cut vein. Leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein where blood flows. Do this once or twice. If there is much flesh, cauterize each one as we have said. Afterwards, treat with ointments until they are clean. And if you cauterize a large vein with a hot cautery, it will have greater benefit.
de plaie mal curee	From poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	If the patient cannot tolerate incision or opening, which we will discuss later, then this disease comes about which cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes to someone and it is inflamed and gives off corrupt moisture and corruption, then you should probe it with a subtle tent, and ensure that you know the entire length of the tent.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to how much it has entered. Then resume cauterizing until the corrupted flesh is burned once, twice or three times, depending on what is needed; and beware of burning the nerves that are near, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the intestines, be careful of these places, and only perform cauterization on solid flesh, thinking that it is not permeable. Afterwards, treat the area until it is clean. If the area is scarred and the matter has been removed for a long time, know that the area is entirely healed. But if the matter has not been removed, know that the area is damaged, and the bone at the front is rotting. And thus one of these things that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	About kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	If pain and coldness come upon the kidneys accompanied by great windiness, and there is no menstrual flow in women, then you should perform cautery on the kidneys on both sides with the cautionary iron that we have mentioned earlier. If we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, which will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	About the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak due to coldness and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then perform cauterization on the part situated above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, with one cautery on the right side and one on the left, each cautery being as long as a wheat grain; and perform one cautery behind the back or two if necessary; and make the cauteries pointed according to the shape mentioned earlier.
de la marris	of anger
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, preventing conception and causing corrupted flowers with delayed menstruation, accompanied by pain during menstruation: then perform three cauteries around the vulva as we have said in relation to the bladder cautery, and two cauteries behind the back; make the cauteries pointed as mentioned earlier.
de la hainche	of the beard
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When moist viscous humors descend to the beard's bag, causing its displacement and resulting in one thigh appearing longer than the other upon measurement, with the separation point being discovered: then cauterize the patient above the beard's bag using one cautery resembling a circle, enclosing the bag before reaching the displacement, so that the bag is within the circle; make the cautery such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not available, then perform three large olive-shaped cauteries, making each cautery as deep as the rest of the heart cauteries; and continue treatment until it is healthy again.
de la dolor de la hainche	of beard pain[TOOL_CALLS]Quant li cuide a la boiste de la hainche, adonques covient que tu face .ij. cauteres parfont et longs, l’un sus l’autre, au dessoubs del leu dou departement del coude, et les autres .iij. cauteres entre les .ii. premiers ou se tu les as faiz; et soient li cauteres tels com cil dont on cauterizeit la boiste de la hainche.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain occurs in the small of the back, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated for this condition as we have described earlier but the treatment is ineffective, and the ailment is chronic: then you must purge the patient of thick humors using foul-smelling pills or similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterwards he performs cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two ways: namely, together hot medicaments, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one way is such that you cauterize upon the boil of the haunch three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and broad, and let there be between each cautery the width of two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes one cautery is made in the middle upon the top of the haunch, whereby there are four cauteries according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	"And if you see it, then cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip joint; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all the hip joint, and all the edges of the heart are burnt."
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain holds only to the haunch and does not reach the thigh nor the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain holds, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers' breadth on the left side; let the cauteries be cutellar-shaped, and burn the thickness of a heartstring; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or near them, cauterize there three points or four at the point called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	"And if necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cutellar or circular cautery, but be very careful in all your cauteries that you do not burn too deeply and injure the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient excessive harm and contraction."
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who made a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted all over.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal inflammation which caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, make a cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men say concerning the cautery of the groin, here is the manner: make it such that it is made of iron and its head is as thick as a hazelnut or slightly less, and it is perforated and let there be spaces between the holes equal to the thickness of a barleycorn; and let the holes be evenly distributed on both sides and shaped like nuts; and let there be one handle well-made of iron. This is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is entirely red and brightly glowing, then place it on the boil of the sick person, turned toward its healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery, leaving it for three days; then make an embrocation of butter, allowing the wound to remain open for a long time; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that few of these cauteries are used due to fear of their appearance, and yet we see few who use them. Nevertheless they are good cauteries, those who can bear them.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of medicine are made thus: make an instrument with holes in which the edges of the door descend, and it should be long on one side and made of brass or iron, and at the top there should be two nuts separated by the thickness of a finger; and let them be open at the front and above, and they should join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After place the box of hot coals on the patient lying on his sound side; then press your hand strongly on the box of hot coals; afterwards throw between the two circles of the hot coal which has been heated in the fire one handful, and let it sit for an hour's time, and suffer the patient the heat and burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For he will find biting like fire there; and when the biting has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot coal of sweet hay, leaving it thus for three days, and put on butter until that which is black from the burn is removed; and let it lie for three more days so that corruption draws out; and this would be the final aid after the treatment of ointments until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make one instrument that takes hay according to what you have done in the hot coal, and this is the manner of the hot coal, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and live chalk, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and place them in a nine-day pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	so that there is a small hole at the bottom so that the point of a razor can enter; and place another well-sealed pot on top of this pot, and put sweet almond oil on top of the quicklime and chalk until you have enough to comfortably hold it in your hand; then leave it like this until water and steam condense and drip into the lead pot below. Then take all that has collected, and apply it to chalk and quicklime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very hot and useful in many medical operations and cauteries for other limbs. For it works like fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hair well, such as pitch, honey of anacardium, chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and greatly praised it, saying that no other treatment was used, and he was immediately healed upon this treatment being performed, as he bathes himself as instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in this manner: You shall take fresh and dry green copper ore, grind it much with a mortar of fat, place it on the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain resides, cover it; leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then have him enter a bath until his body is slightly warmed, and then have him lie in bed, and all the pain will leave and he shall be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicines as cautery unless after evacuation of flesh.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it helps much; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in old oil, then place it on the hollow between the big toe of the foot and the one called 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterward, take dry goat dung and burn it until it becomes charcoal. Put it on the linen and let it heat until it's extinguished; repeat this process again until you believe by sensation that the heat reaches the hip area and the pain stops. This method of cautery is called 'cautere de chievre'.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from an impact, or from excessive evacuation, or from the appearance of dispersed cold matter, in none of these cases is cautery useful except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after the patient has been emptied of fetid pills or other such things, one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with ink, each line containing five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery called "point"; and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the middle clavicle bone according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often occurs in young children, and its beginning is indicated by their having difficulty breathing when they rise up, and fear. And you find behind the spine of the back and on our appearance that which comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to treat it, cauterize with the cautery of the backbone according to this form:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery evenly scorches each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see fit, scorch around the spine with the cautery point twice or thrice, and let the points be close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Then heal the wound until it is clean according to what we have said, and beware not to apply cautery in any gibbosity near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	Of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pains are caused by moistures that have spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the foot, which doctors properly call "podagra," and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured with medicines, then it can be cured by cautery in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you press upon the face of the foot, make cautery with all the cautery called 'point'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains reach down to the knees and other joints, which happens often, make cautery with three cauteries or four on each knee, with every olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but hold your hand back so that the point of the heart's blade is not burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make two puncture marks around the wrist; and if there remains any pain on the arms, then make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains reach to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you administer good care and purge phlegm, it shall be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	"about the dislocation of the hip socket"
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When gout comes to the ankles, and the bulls descend to the joints newly, it is necessary that when you see him curing, he should not chew anything that day; and let him use things that leave the belly so that the feces descend from his belly. Afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his tail until the eyes are repaired, then bind it with your two hands, and press firmly under the gout near the bone of the wrist, and there is a sign like half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery which is here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it is white and casts shadows.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bowels to their place; and the minister keep his hand upon them so they do not slip back; and open the patient's thighs well, and put one cushion beneath him and another behind his knees, and a third behind his back where you will hold his hands; then place the cautery on the sign of Leo with your right hand, until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you do; and be careful that the bowel does not slip out when you apply the cautery; so as not to burn it; and ensure that by doing this the patient does not die or suffer another harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterization of children should be subtle according to their size, and for adults it should also be large according to theirs; afterwards three days after the cauterization, apply butter until the blister is removed; afterwards apply other ointments until it heals, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and their bandages should remain on for a long time so that the eyes do not jump out when they try to get up from bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when they want to get up, let them provide a well-made bandage and keep it on for another forty days. And they should rest well, so that they do not work too much, guard against excessive drinking and eating, and from raising their voice too high; and if they follow this instruction, they will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	I will now tell you the treatment for cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Chapter on Laparotomy
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any further, cauterize it with the cautery according to its quantity, and burn one-third of the heart; afterwards heal it according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at three angles in this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the spot of entrance and draw a line across its width above the rupture, and another below it, and hold your hand firmly throughout the entire operation.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of old pain in some limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, either from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and remedies of medicine are not effective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of torsions and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the patient is without wound from the first cautery, that is good; but if not, begin another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that the member nearby must change, therefore you must perform cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	"Of dislocations"
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Warts are helped sometimes by cautery with great benefit, especially those that come from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you wish to cauterize the eye, beware if the disease is at its beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the whole patient. Then make five cauteries on the head: one between the eyebrows, another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; two on both horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and let your hand rest until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the skin blisters come out so that the vapors of thick humors can escape from them. And cauterize it on the face according to what is before [you].
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	"And if the dislocation is spread everywhere and it is clearly apparent, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned on top: one at the nape of the neck, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the hip and another near it, and two on the shoulders; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are behind the heel; and sometimes one cautery is made on the bone of the wrist, and one on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver."
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more cauteries you perform, the greater help you give, and the more benefit they [the patient] receive; and know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find them described in the methods of using irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply a poultice made from wheat flour with honey, along with other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but is not healed, then apply cauteries to the limb according to its size; let the cautery be a little deep into the flesh where the heart is located; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cauteries are applied to the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and similarly if the swelling has been removed; and nonetheless no one should meddle with it unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of Albarras
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the illness called "albaras" is advanced and remedies of medicine are ineffective, then cauterize with a cautery that penetrates somewhat deeply, according to the quantity of the space of the heart until the swelling is removed and its color is changed; then treat with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of a pigeon and blood of an owl, each one part; and mix it all together, and tie it up in a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	For the cure of chancre by cautery:
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a boil begins to form, and you see it stop, then cauterize it with the fire cautery at its base, all around the boil.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	Moreover, wise men say that one should also cauterize the middle of the boil. However, this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, as has happened before. It is more proper that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circule," as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling that cannot subside
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called "adubelati" and it is slow to heal either because of the excessiveness of its discharge or because of the frailty of the patient due to old age, or because of thick blood, or because of time; and you see that it is hastening towards death: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, prickingly; afterward leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she rushes to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	"And if you wish to pierce it entirely with the cautery, heat the cautery which is described here:"
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand on the center of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery pierces through to the heart; let the cautery be such that the patient feels its power in this way, so that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	"The cure by fire with iron"
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease exists which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than an eating away of limbs, for it consumes the members as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate fire cautery, then heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is needed for the location where the disease is; afterwards, cauterize it on all sides until you remove all corruption, and let nothing remain of it, so that everything that is corrupted is taken away.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized places a poultice made with oil until the burns of the fire are healed, and all corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After treating with ointments that generate heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see no healthy flesh growing, then it is good. But if not, then recommence the cautery on that which has remained from corrupted flesh.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this wound has sometimes been cured with hot medicine in place of fire cautery. However, fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already mentioned the cure for hot medicine in its section: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	"of swellings that come on the feet"
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often, at the feet there arises a disease called "clos" in our understanding, which is a large, broken thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is when you heat a cautery iron like a vault-pen, made of good iron to the size that it can surround the nail on all sides with subtle edges. Then place it hot on the nail and turn your hand all around the nail until you reach the top of the nail. Leave it there for three days until it begins to emit pus. Then make an poultice of wild mallow leaves crushed with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cleanse the location of ointment until it is free from flesh.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted away from the body, and this happens many times in hands and feet, then you must bring cautery of hot water to it; and this is done in such manner: take a pipe of brass or iron, or a quill of goose feather, and place it on the nail and its base, which means warts; and place the pipe around so that it encompasses everything entirely, then pour some hot water into it, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the pipe comes to the root of the nail, and can find a deep path for the hot water to reach the root; and let the patient endure the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will deroot itself entirely with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus does one after another, until you remove all those which are on the body, then treat them with herbs that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	And the treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone is trembling from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other fever, then you should make for them four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one between each spine; and one on the foot, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery; this will stop the trembling, and the health of the body will be restored from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	And of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never do boils or foul pustules appear on the body which come from corrupt, thick matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	Therefore, when they first appear, one must perform a cauterization on each head of the boil with a fine cautery made from myrtle wood or long-rooted Aristolochia, heated in fire, or with a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And they are sometimes cauterized at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they cannot grow further from then on but the excess matter whence they come is removed, and they become clean. However, this should be done after evacuating blood.
quant li artere est copee	When an artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or at the incision of the boil, or at the cautery of the member, and in similar things; and it is very difficult to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And moreover when this happens to anyone, one should quickly place their two index fingers on the wound's opening and press very hard until the blood is pacified beneath your fingers and no more drops come out; then put on the fire olive oil cauteries of various sizes both large and small until they are all red hot; then take either a large or small cautery according to the wound and the place where the artery runs, and place the cautery upon that vein where you hold your fingers, holding it there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if blood suddenly flows forth when you lift your fingers from the wound and the cautery has expired, quickly take another one of the cauteries that are on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after another until the bleeding is stopped. And take care that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the sick person. And know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stopped except by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it is not too large, or by tightly binding a thread, or by medicines applied that have power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and pressed appropriately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings about stopping by tying very tightly with cloths or putting hot things upon it, or similar things, it profits little if at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has neither surgeon nor medicine present, one should place their index finger on the wound's opening as we have said, and press very hard until it is stopped above the wound and the vein; and do not move your finger, but moisten it with cold water often and make it very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped. And then do what is necessary with cauteries and medicines afterward.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the remedies for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	In the first chapter we have told you about every disease in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter at the beginning for ease of finding what one wants. And now I will go along the same path in this chapter so that one may find more easily what they desire.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And before I begin this chapter, dear friend, you should know that in this one there is more danger and fear than in the first about cauteries, and therefore greater caution is necessary.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the practice of this chapter there are many times evacuations of blood when opening wounds and making incisions on boils and treating wounds, and extracting splinters and making incisions on stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many people die thereby.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to do anything foolish.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come seeking treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	Among them are those who cherish their illness so much that they die easily due to the foolishness they find in their sickness and the severity of their madness. One should fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And among these there are those who give it meaning and say: 'wait, I am cured'; but the disease is treacherous.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your greed, and do not open foolishly but wisely those from whom you are certain, and from whom you can gain praise and fame; and use prognosis and diagnosis in treating your patients so that health may be restored; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear beloved son, May Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if He wishes to inspire you with His holy breath, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	"Or I have arranged this chapter in sections, dividing it into chapters according to what is before the chapter on cauteries that I have already divided from head to toe, so that you may find more easily those things of which you will have need."
dou chief plein d’aigue	"head full of water"
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	**Know that this ailment often comes to children at birth, and when the mother squeezes too hard on the child's head; sometimes it happens due to an unknown cause.**
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	**And I have never seen this ailment happen outside of children, and for all those that I have seen, the jaw is dislocated; therefore it seems to me that it would be best if I left aside the rest of my work in such cases.**
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	**And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and each day it swelled so much that he could hardly bear it; and the swelling increased so much that it reached the mouth, and this swelling is collected beneath the bone above the spleen, between the heart and the bone; and if the swelling is between the heart and the bone, and the tumors are small, you should make a cut in the head that is wide, and as long as two fingers, wherever the swelling reaches. Here is the shape of the spatula:**
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	**If the swelling is greater, and the tumors are larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, like this:**
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	**And if the swelling is beneath the bone, and you see that the angles of the head are raised on each side, and water gushes out when you press it with your hand inside, but there is no response: then you must make three cuts in the head in this manner:**
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After applying compresses and powders, put wine and oil on it, and leave it like that until the fifth day; then untie it, and dress the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the limb rest evenly, and give the patient dry food with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	**And another way of incision is to look where the greatest part of the tumor opens and where the water is collected; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.**
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	**Therefore cut where the tumor opens and where the water is collected, and make the incision according to what you can do; but beware that you do not cut the artery; for if a vein bleeds profusely, then the patient will die from loss of blood and evacuation of swelling.**
de reume	**de reume**
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When one has a disease called "catarra" in the eyes or the foot, and the disease is chronic, and medical treatment does not help at all, then the final remedy is fire cauteries with the application of two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, therefore, when you cover the eyes that the patient turn their head back; afterward rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient hold their neck with the cloth; next observe where the vein was and the places of both are after the ears, and they are ready to be opened; then mark the places with hot cautery, then cut both with a sharp spatula in two parts so that the cut vein reaches the bone, and this should be done near the wide part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, place the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting about two fingers' width across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	Once the vein is severed, blood flows out continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the arteries do not appear upon feeling, then you must measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then mark with hot cautery and cut until the bone; and as much blood as should be let out is six ounces, but sometimes a little more or less according to what the patient can bear and the fullness of the artery. Then examine the wound: if there remains on the bone point of the syphac, then cut it so that no abscess may come, then press the wound and bind it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	de emigrainne
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes on, and catarrh is present due to the moistness of tears and heat in the temples, causing ancient madness and similar symptoms, even when treated with various remedies, if no improvement is seen, then extract the arteries from the temples using cauterization, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of extracting them is that the patient should shave the hair from their temples and locate the artery which opens into the temple, for it is quite visible due to its pulsating motion, although in some people who are very cold it may be less apparent. If it is not apparent, the patient should wrap a cloth around the neck to restrict blood flow, then rub the area with a coarse cloth and wash it with warm water until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the spatula shaped as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then grasp it with pincers and carefully cut away the surrounding tissues from each part; and if the artery is thin, twist it with the point of a nail file, then cut off that part according to the amount of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not cut, the blood will not flow entirely out.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw six drops of blood until three; and if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with a strong silk thread so that corruption does not come before the wound heals, and let blood flow freely; then cut away the excess flesh between the two ties at this same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize with a cutting cautery until the bone is reached; and this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery aids in finishing moisture: therefore it is of greater aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where, for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and put on well-made dressings; and when they are removed, cure them with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and dressings, until it is healed. And if blood flows from the artery as many times as you work there, hasten to cauterize with a copper cautery, or fill the place with vitriol and hold your hand steady until the blood is stanched; and if this is not present, put your fist on the place until the blood congeals, and wash the place with cold water until the blood stops, and press it as it should be. And that which is quicker and lighter in extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein with a cutting cautery of two parts, but let the cuts be well spaced to retain heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	But when the instruments are too thin, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be a space of one finger's width between the two knives, and then when you have marked both places with incisions, and you measure with the heated iron until it reaches the bone, cut the vein at both places; and they should be distant between the two incisions for this cautery is not continuous throughout. And this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the forehead of the head, and it does not help to apply medicine there, and you see the face becoming redder, and feel on the forehead a trembling as if from shivering; and if the eyelids are thin and moist so that the hairs of the eyelashes have fallen out, and the eyelashes are heated and scraped by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called this wound in old times "a bruise", and it is to be treated thus: make three incisions on the forehead of the patient who has this illness, evenly spaced according to the length of the forehead; one incision should be as long as two fingers, running downwards from just above the eyebrows to the nose, and the other two should be placed on either side of the temples, above the eyebrows, being careful not to cut the arteries located on either side of the temples; keep your hand away from the line connecting the two jaws, and each wound should be the width of three fingers joined together; then prepare a sponge and many cloths for wiping away blood, and use the spatula shaped thus:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And scrape away all the skin that is between the two incisions down to the temple bone, then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then insert into the first incision an instrument called a "cultellarium," which is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other without being sharp; this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp side of the knife towards the flesh near the heart, and the blunt side towards the bone, and press until it reaches the middle furrow.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to those that open near the heart, and then repeat on the other side; then draw out the blood evenly, and press the wound to stop bleeding; then place in each furrow a bandage of old cotton, and cover with cloths moistened in wine and oil and hyssop, and ensure no abscesses form; and on the third day remove the bandages, and apply abundant water from tansy plants, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	Of the treatment of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	If catarrh often comes upon you, and you see the eyelids thin and small, and your vision is weakened, and the eyelashes are burned; and the hairs fall out, and deep pain in the head, and the patient sneezes; then know by these symptoms that this matter and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure for it is this:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is necessary that you instruct the patient to lie on their back, then make a deep incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one wide at the temple.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Beginning from the left temple's crease to the right temple, let the incision reach the bone; keep your hand away from the temple nerves that move during chewing; once the bone is exposed, absorb all the blood with a sponge, then open the wound's two lips and insert old cotton and linen strips. Next, bind it with cloths moistened in wine and oil, ensuring no hot abscess forms. After removal, rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and apply this plaster to these wounds to stimulate the growth of flesh everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Here is an illustration of the instrument described in the text:
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things:
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	If something like a stone falls into the ear or otherwise enters but does not fit and does not grow within the ear, then place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distill some drops of violet oil or sesame oil into it, then attempt extraction. When doing so, make them sneeze with condisium, and plug their nostrils when they sneeze, and place cloth or wool pieces around the ear; stretch the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often fire comes from this treatment; if it does not come by itself, bring about extraction with delicate pincers, of which here is the method:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it does not come out with forceps, that is good; if not, bring about extraction with a fine needle of small thickness. And if it does not come out that way, make a cane of straw and put the head of the cane into the hole of the ear strongly, and stop up what is around the cane with soft wax so that wind cannot enter with the cane; then draw fire very vigorously, for often fire comes in this manner as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, take glutinous substance which birds use, and put some on an instrument which is sharp for this purpose, and put a little cotton around; then press the glut on the stone or whatever thing it may be, and draw fire.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before aposteme comes and spasm. And the manner of cutting is this: first let the sick person be bled from the cephalic vein according to his strength, then make the sick person sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small crescent-shaped cut in the root of the ear where it depends; then pull out the stone according to your power, and suck it quickly into your mouth. And continue the treatment until he is cured.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are inside and the ear becomes swollen, bring about extraction accordingly. And if it cannot come out, bring about extraction with a thin, subtle spatula according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And make an incision into that boil.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this if you think the boil is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many incisions; then extract it with delicate pincers and tweezers, as we have said, so that the extraction is complete.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, in the water that falls into the ear, the patient must use sternutation with conditions first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie on his/her same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it then breaks out through this boil, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, then take many needles according to the length of your thin and light fingers, heat them slightly in fire; and let the patient insert one or two of these needles into his/her ear hole, allowing another end to stick out on the other side, and strike with another needle on the needle that is in the ear; do not stop doing this until all the water flows out, and thus it will all flow out; if you see, then take a piece of juncus grass, insert one end into the ear and hold the other end near fire until the end of the juncus grass is burned; then repeat this with other pieces of juncus grass until all the water flows out, as we have said about the needle.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an animal, if it is small-bodied, such as a flea or something similar, treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is large-bodied so that you can feel it, bring about extraction with forceps; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of earthworms in ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in treating distillations, and if the treatment does not help, it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight: if any worms are visible, extract them with fine forceps; but if they cannot be seen, take the pipe of which this form is here:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Place the most subtle head of the funnel into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck strongly until all the veins empty; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey coming out, then plug around the funnel with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the expulsion of worms, and you will find them in the chapter on distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, of which here is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be of silver or bronze narrow below with a small hole, and above open for distillation; and for pressing within the distillation, one well-made brass instrument for this purpose, and if you wish take one razor and wrap cotton around its point neatly; then pour your oil or juice, and what you wish of your medicines into the tube, and the tube should be in the ear; then place within the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled cleanly from the ear; and let the patient feel it within, and let the distillation be one small heated vessel on the fire beforehand when it is distilled into the ear; and guard that it not be too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Here is an illustration of the instrument described in the text:
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ears; the same thing happens to adults due to injury of the ear or flesh growing inside it, and these blockages sometimes occur deep within the ear so that one cannot see them; sometimes there is only partial obstruction of the hole.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when it occurs deep within the ear so that one cannot see it, it is difficult to treat in many ways. But in cases where you can see the obstruction, you should place the patient's ear in the sun and look inside: if you see the dark spot clearly, then perform the operation described below:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and cutting before and behind entirely full, so that it does not wound the ear; if the obstruction is of flesh born in the body of the ear, hold it with fine pincers, and cut it lightly, until all that flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the wax is deeply embedded in the ear, then take a fine razor blade and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the wax which the patient feels great pain in hearing, pierce it lightly, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a wick according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or else take a tampon and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriol upon it. And if you see that the ear is swollen, then it is necessary to remove the tampon and replace it with another one moistened in cerote which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling has subsided; then cleanse it until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is a discharge of blood coming out, then plunge a sponge wrapped in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the flow of blood which are found in treatises on distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the flesh of pears
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the remedy that comes from the flesh of pears when they are moist and then become dry: you should stretch them with forceps and pincers, and cut it with a scalpel at its roots; then sprinkle powdered vitriol on it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they continue to grow without being cut down, then cauterize them with a lenticular cautery instrument, and the cauterizing afterwards cuts off more of their roots. And often they need to be retreated several times because some thing remains from their roots; but when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not grow back again.
de la gresle	Of hailstones
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, papers come from the eyes containing things that appear like hail in shape and hardness, and therefore this illness is called "hail," being a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the treatment is such: be careful if the hail moves from one side to another, which is easy to know; then make an incision wide enough, then scrape off each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and cut it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	But if you cannot cut it without piercing the paper somewhat, it does not harm the patient; and if the split is large, then join it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use force, for the eyelids will soon restore themselves and close over it.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn the skin and stretch it with pincers and cut out the hail, pressing on both sides. If the skin is stretched by the incision, do not worry about it; but once the hail has been cut out, rinse the wound with salt water, and treat it with ointment that brings new flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of the ears
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that infiltrates into the tissues of the eyelids above, and this happens more often in children than adults, causing great pain to their eyes, and they have cataracts in the mornings, and cannot look at sunlight because tears quickly gather in their eyes; and therefore they lie on their backs all the time, sleeping like that, with their eyelids moist beneath their eyebrows, and the swelling and appearance are covered by exinach that opens into the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press there with your two hands and feel it come out.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of treatment is as follows: the patient should put their head in your hand. Then take one linen cloth and prepare it like a circle according to the quantity that contains the eczema on each part. Then place it over them and press with your fingers on both sides so that the eczema collects within the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of the moisture with a scalpel, making it no larger than the wound made for bleeding. And cut deep into the skin until you reach the eczema. And in several positions, eczema will come out of the incision, resembling a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then extract all at once with a piece of cloth between your fingers, squeezing it back and forth from left to right until it is dispersed. And be careful not to squeeze too hard against the incision so that you do not draw out the scalpel or cause bleeding.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	"And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the slit, then slightly widen the slit lightly until it opens; then extract as we have said, then soak cloths in warm water and vinegar, and place them on the wound, and bind with bandages."
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are such men who grind salt and place it on top to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal until they are healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot boil comes to the place, then treat it with soothing plaster until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	"of the hairs of papers"
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	"When hairs grow on papers besides their natural ones and are entwined, they harm the eyes and cause diseases like habitual tears and softening of the papers and opacity, to such an extent that it causes destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to treat it: either by cauterization with fire together, or by hot medicine according to what is written in the cautery chapter, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by caustics, depending on what I will say."
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	"It is necessary that you place the head of the sick person in your lap, then turn the paper away from the eye with your left hand; if it turns, it's good; if not, insert a needle at one thread above it; and whether it is near the edge of the paper or where the hairs are growing next to these hairs, and draw one thread up along the entire paper, and turn it towards the razor; then cut into the part below the paper, below the attached hairs, with all the spatula coping, from the large larmier to the small; then extract one thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the paper, then press on the paper with an incense burner, like a mirror glass, and in any case, the figure should be according to the quantity that you see raising the paper that is divided into two."
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is need to cut off a large quantity of paper according to how moist the paper is; then cut along the two lines that you have marked out, starting from the large opening down to the small; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert one of the points into one of the corners of the heart, then peel off all the skin; then sew up the two lips with a needle and a thin thread of silk, and wipe away the blood, and tie up the excess threads on both eyebrows with any sticky substance you see fit to use; if not, do not worry about it, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitching with drying and constricting substances, for the paper relieves the joining of the wound and its assembly, but stitches are harmful (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear; and there is another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of a laurel tree, as we have described, with three points opened according to the shape that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	"Then cut what is above the small circles evenly according to the shape that is here:"
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you lack the power to hold the forceps, and the matter is not even, then take a needle with thread, and insert it into the figure. And insert another thread near the large bell, and the second thread near the small one, and bring them together evenly between your two fingers; then raise your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have marked, as we have described, then close the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is clean. And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are turned: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitches in both are more artful.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The care of the canines is in this form: and it is that you turn the paper and make the cut inside according to what I have said, then make two canines by art, and two thin threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula; then cut at the two ends of the two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other finely on top of the paper of the eye, and strain the two canines from the two parts firmly; leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will wrinkle and harden and whiten, until it shrinks by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, then apply forceps once, then cure until it is clean. And when the wound is healed and the paper lifted off, and the hairs will no longer prick; and this is the shape of the two canines that you should make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The procedure is as follows: Take a fine needle and insert one thread of soft, thin silk; then tie the ends together finely, and let the length of the threads be a palm long. Then prepare another thin silk thread briefly, and tie its end to the threads; then have the patient place his head in your hand, and stand near the sun so that the procedure is clear, for it is a subtle and fine procedure. Then insert the needle all the way into the hairline next to the root of the hair, and pierce it quickly through the paper until you pull it out above the natural hair; then pull the hair up to the chase, and insert that hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand back so that all the hairs come out of the chase into the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase has been completed but the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the chase down from underneath all the thread that you have prepared, until the chase comes out of the hole above and you can see it with your eye; then pull the chase and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair settles in its place and flesh grows over it. And if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural eyebrows and lift it up with that one, so that it is separated and then lifted up.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the rottenness of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or decay occurs in the eye, it comes in two ways: natural and unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, cut, or cautery, or similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to treat it is that you should cut open that scab, separate its lips, and place cotton made of linen inside, until it becomes clean. Do not use things that dry out and constrict in treating it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before. But there are things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or alehoof cooked with linseed, and eye ointments made from diacylon melted in one of the oils should be used for bandaging it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	The goal of this treatment is to ensure that the wound does not heal in the same shape as it was before. The treatments we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease and not a guarantee that it will not return in its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of flesh coming into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is underneath is truly called "axacrati" and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and split and cautery and similar things; and the way of working in this is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid towards the right, so that the threads come out in two holes of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above all the needle, and cut with one wide spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what it should be, that is good; but if not, then take one razor and place it in the split, and turn the paper, and make two splits on the inside edges of the paper; and let the holes of the two splits be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter called "I Greek"; then remove that flesh according to the quantity of its sides and below what supports the paper, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a wool thread; then perform the care that we have said about softening medicines, and dressings, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitches or cautery, you should make a full-length incision under the hairs of the paper, following what was said earlier. Then separate the two leaves of a wick between them, as I have described before. The operation must be done according to the shape of the disease, for it is very varied in form. Skilled masters devise various means with all their power to make the figure return to its natural shape. And the sick person himself, according to what is needed in treatment and instruments, may vary his operations in many ways.
dou soudement de la papiere	Regarding the sudden tearing of paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this sudden tearing happens to many people in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of the eye, and cannot move nor perform its natural operations, then you must insert the point of a razor under the paper and lift it upwards. Then stretch it with tweezers until you cut what is stuck with a fine spatula that is neither too large nor too sharp, so that the sick person cannot bear if the spatula were too large or scratched the eye. Make your incision light so that the paper returns to its natural shape. Remove all that was stuck and sometimes apply saltwater to the eye, then rinse it with fresh water and collyrium. Then place a linen wick between the paper and the eye, and put wet wool moistened in egg yolk on the eye. After the third day, use collyrium and other warming substances until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Regarding the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the corner of the eye can appear in two ways: one is nervous and resembles a hard, dry skin; the other is not nervous but resembles a moist, congealed blister. When touched with iron or attempted to be grasped with tweezers, it cannot be taken. Both kinds start near the large tear duct and gradually increase until they cover all of the eye's vision and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	The manner of incision is as follows: the patient places their head in your hand, then opens their eyes. You lift the paper with your hand and coil the corner with tweezers of fine double edge, stretching it upwards. Then take a needle and attach one horse hair or cow hair or ox hair to it, along with a strong thread. Double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the corner, pushing it through entirely. Tie the corner with a thread and stretch it upwards. Remove all of the skin along the side of the corner that covers the pupil and sclera up to the head using a fine spatula and small forceps. Leave the natural tissue in the tear duct so that tears can flow naturally after the incision. Sometimes, the corner is stretched only with tweezers and thread, as mentioned earlier. Then remove it entirely with a soft spatula of this form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure that the spatula does not touch the delicate tissue and tear it, nor should the pupil be pierced. After the incision, sprinkle some crushed mallow on the eye and apply collyrium made from litargirum, leaving it overnight. Then treat as necessary until healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the corner is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle nor can tweezers grasp it, many times this kind of corner is cured with medicines. As I have mentioned in the division, they appear like this, and if you see one that needs to be removed, open the eye of the patient and use a light spatula shaped like this:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the finger gently, and if you see it does not decrease in width and reason presses on it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of litharge and red ochre and crushed salt, and stop up the eye until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same operation, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	But if something opposes you in the eye, such as an inflamed sore, then use milk, and first cure the hot sore until it is healthy; then resume the operation as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh in the eye causes great harm to the eye, then suspend it from a goat's horn and cut off a portion of it, but not all, so that tears do not come forth; then distill into the eye red collyrium made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Eyes of some men are sometimes born with red hair,
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, it is necessary that you alleviate the cure of each weak eye by natural means; and as for accidental cases, perform surgery with iron; and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that these members can endure this operation.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Before veins appear red which cover over the eye, they render sight ineffective and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is then your task to first examine the eye in which the white of the eye appears, and if there is no other visible disease besides the white; therefore proceed in this manner: instruct the patient to place their head on your lap, then press these veins gently all around according to your skill, and make the lap subtle double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there shall be two onions placed degree by degree in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then twist these onions subtly with force, and squeeze the blood afterwards one after another until you see those veins move outside of the eye. Be careful not to cut the eye with the points of the tweezers, and perform this task at midday before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you only affect those veins. Once you have done this, distill green and red vitriol oil into the eye to corrupt what remains of the sebaceous material.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	"And if you are unable to capture all of them at that time,
de la fistule de l’oil	Fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The surgeon calls a fistula of the eye «arissati». When you cure it using cauterization and hot medicine according to what I have said before, but it is not healed, there must be something inside that makes you cut open the boil where it should burst, and drain all the moisture that is there until the bone becomes visible.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone becomes visible and you see corruption and blackness there, then prepare all the instruments of which this is the shape; it is called «aspre chief» (sharp head), and should be made of iron with one blunt end, and should be pointed like a file as it appears in the present shape
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the bone that is corrupted, then twist it between your two fingers and press down a little until you know that all the corruption has been removed. Do this several times, then apply medicinal powders to dry out the wound.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the place is solid, and flesh grows, and the body of the rib remains solid like this for 40 days, and it does not change or become an abscess, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healthy; but if not, then there is only one option: to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nostril according to this form. And so you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with hot medicines, and when it is uncovered, take a drill according to this form, and make the head of the iron at three angles, and thin out the shaft until its tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the ear, and move your hand away from the eye and cheek, then turn the drill until it pierces the bone, which the patient will feel due to the wind entering there if they hold their hand over their nose. Then restore the wound with dry medicines as I have instructed, and when the flesh grows and hardens the place, then the matter goes to the nose; thus it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Regarding the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the eye opens wide all around and nothing disturbs the nose or makes it smaller, then you must bandage the sick person. Then wash them, then place cupping glasses on their head without pricking them to suck out the blood. Then put a poultice made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcolac on the eye, then compress the eye and cover it with bandages and cloths. And the manner of the cloths is as follows: take soft cloths and double each one four times, then place them on top of each other according to the amount that the eye needs. Then compress it firmly with a hard bandage from above, and then recommence the cupping glasses without pricking to suck out the blood. Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye compressed day and night. And if the poultice melts, you must remove it. Then remove the poultice after the day and night, and if you see that the eye is healing, that is good. But if not, then recommence the compressing and bandages and poultice and cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Regarding the rupture of a blood vessel in the eye
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a rupture occurs in the blood vessel of the eye and it opens and blood comes out like a grain of resin, and it is frightening to see. Then if you see this happen, do as follows: take a needle and insert it into the root of the lower part of the eye up to the upper part. Then take another needle with a doubled thread at the lachrymal gland area and make it pierce there, leaving the first needle in place. Then tie one part of the uve around with the doubled thread and compress it well. Then remove the needle and place wet linen dipped in egg yolk on the eye. Leave it until the blood coagulates with the uve. Then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed. And sometimes the wound is constrained by the uve on each side with a circle of cloth until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye has a large appearance, then pierce it with a thin spatula that comes out from deep within the eye and remove the moist albugo and let the eye descend, and enter in as quickly as possible. Then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	Regarding the bowing of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This illness called "alcunnati" is nothing but a vein gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not water. The manner of its appearance during surgery is as follows: have the patient sit on an upright chair prepared for them, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the vein come up to your eyes. Then pierce it with a needle, ensure that it does not descend and block light, and let the patient see things as they usually do; if it does not descend below, know that it is watery matter, and if the descent of the vein is not as we have described, then it is watery matter.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the patient sits between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make an incision through the connective tissue with the corneal layer and the crown until the boil bursts; and once it has burst, distill hot water mixed with honey or fenugreek boiled in water into the eye, then dress it with another dressing until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Regarding the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have shown here the likenesses of waters in their divisions, and what should be pierced; thus we work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light for the sun, and hold the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or right hand if it's right. Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, or left hand if it's right, the instrument called "almagda"; then place the tip of the instrument near the crown along the thickness of a grain from that blister of the eye towards the lesser lacrimal part; then gently push the instrument called "almagda" and twist your hand until it pierces into the blister of the eye, and feel when almagda reaches empty space. And the measure of the path of almagda must reach as deep as the measure from the pit of the plum to the end of the blackness; and that is the crown of the eye. Then you will see the bone through that paper due to the clarity of the corneal layer, then place the instrument up to where the water is, then press it below one vein after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If water descends now, then the patient sees before them and the tool in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a moment, if the water rises again along the second path, place the funnel with the tool. When it is inserted and it does not rise, gently extract almagdum in a circular motion little by little with your hand. Then add a drop of hot gemstone oil to the eye and remove the eye from the eyelid inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place over the eye a plug of wax or wet linen in rose oil and egg yolk, and bind it with a sound eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Nowadays, we and those of our time use ground comfrey mixed with egg yolks.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are some men whose eyes are too hard, you must take the tool called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then carefully pierce the conjunctiva only, not too deeply but make it subtle, then insert almagdum as we have said. At the completion of the work prepare for the patient a suitable attendant who causes them to sleep on their back in a dark room; and keep them steady from all movements, let them eat light foods, do not move their head to the right or left, and bind them according to their condition until the third day; then untie them in the same dark room, test their sight, and make them see certain things. Then reapply the binding until the seventh day. Do not perform this during or immediately after the operation but rather earlier so that water does not rise hurriedly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess appears, then on the seventh day, untie the eye before it, and apply a poultice that softens abscesses; once it has softened, untie the bandage and place over it a compress of lint to cover for some days, and keep it constantly in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then little by little leave the house, and return to your usual habits; know that no disciples should interfere in this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And there came to us one from the land of Iraq who told us that in their country they used almagda to pierce, and then suck out the water, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in our land nor read about it in the books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And here are the likenesses of the forms of almagda so that those who do not know them may see them, and they should be made of pure gold:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the heads of these be of this same subtlety, and the rear ones at three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	To cauterize flesh on the nostril:
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes various kinds of discolored scars appear, among which some resemble many-legged scorptions; there are also those with flesh colored like fox fur, and others with soft flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For those soft scars that are not inflamed, seat the patient between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils and sprinkle them with a drop of incense on those scars, then rub them vigorously; afterwards take what you can hold on the tip of a thin, sharp spatula on one side until you know that all the flesh is scraped off.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is still something that cannot be scraped away, open it with one of the sharp instruments lightly and completely until nothing remains. And if without pain or heat, cover the wound with cotton, and if it is malignant sores, cauterize them quickly so that the blood stops flowing and all the flesh is removed. Then apply a poultice made of oatmeal and vinegar to the bone.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose opens and moistures reach the palate, know that it is healthy; but if moistures do not penetrate as they should, know that there is flesh grown into the bone above, to which the instrument cannot reach: thus you must insert a thread of fine linen, about the thickness of your little finger or less, dampened with warm water and spiced with one grain of incense between each knot; let the patient hold the head of the thread in his nostril with moderate force, and draw it through while smelling until it passes into the mouth; many children do this at school, and it is easy for whoever wishes to perform it; then hold the head that emerges from the nostril with one hand, and the other head that emerges from the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart gently as we have shown you.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the knots have rotted away the flesh, then pull out the thread, cleanse the blood, and moisten it with Egyptian oil; replace it in the nostril as before. Do this for 3 days or more until the oil has corrupted all remaining flesh; then insert a cake of lead into the nostril for several days until it is healed. If there is need for drying medicines, use them accordingly. This is the form of the instrument used to purge the head, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp with a tube like a candle wick, and the tube should also have many holes at its tip for purging the nostril; and if you wish to use a closed tube, make sure that the instrument is full of liquid for purging the head. And let it have several small openings at the top so that one can hold it securely while heating the oil or any other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	To cauterize flesh on the nostril:
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the head's top,
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and cauterized
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solution continues to come forth from one of these worked cartilage joints, it is profitable little, save for some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then when this happens to anyone, see if the wound is fresh in all its blood; and then join the two lips together with a suture, then dress it until it is healed; and if the lips are already torn on both sides, then you must scrape away all parts of their core until they are clean, then join the two lips together with a suture, and tie them, and powder over the powders dragon's blood powder, and crushed incense; and place over the powders a piece of strong plaster or other sticking plaster, and leave it on until it falls off by itself, then dress it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of stitching is thus: either by needles, as we have said in the belly stitching; or by thread, as I have taught you.
des apostemes des levres	Chilblains on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many people have hard chilblains on the lips, resembling grains of wheat, small and large. Therefore, you should turn the lips and cut each nodule with scissors and remove it with tweezers by cutting in every part. Then apply powdered vitriol to the incision until the wound is clean. Afterward, wash the area with warm water and dress the wound with dry substances until it heals.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often, attached flesh appears on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore, you should hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, allowing the blood vessel or vein to flow. Then apply powdered vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders to the area. If the flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; afterwards, it will not return. These are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	Of boils
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes, rough and sharp scabs appear on the gums in the mouth between the teeth, and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or worm-eaten, causing corruption to reach the gums and making the teeth smell bad. Therefore, you should have the patient sit with their head in your lap and raise their lips so that nothing remains on the teeth. Do this for blackness, greenishness, yellowness, and other stains until they are cleaned. If what caused it is removed at first, it is good; if not, resume cleaning on the second and third day until everything is clean. Know that teeth require various forms of instruments for cleaning according to what the work shows, as those used to scrape the outside of teeth have different shapes than those used to clean between them. Have all these forms and others ready with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you are treating a toothache, you should delay extracting it as much as possible, for this should never be done. For it is a very high and delicate substance until there is no other option but to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained by toothache, you must be certain of the painful tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain leaves the patient, and they think it is in the healthy tooth, and have the good tooth pulled; but still the pain does not depart for this reason, because the evil one has been removed, for we have often seen this happen to these saints. And when you are certain of the painful tooth, then you must scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then move it with your two fingers or with fine tongs little by little until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp it with the tongs; and keep the patient's head between your knees, and hold yours still so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these tools and gently insert it on each side, and use the lever tool as you have done previously.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perforated and wobbly, you must fill the hole with lint where it is pierced; and gently hold it with forceps so that it does not break while extracting; and much bleeding will occur around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful that you do not break it, and if any part remains, it will return to the patient with greater pain from the root than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons who through haste and recklessness sometimes break the jawbone, and do not use what we have described here; but often cause great illness in people due to remains of roots or broken jawbone, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the area with wine, vinegar, or salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, fill the wound with powdered vitriol; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments used for extracting teeth first should have long points and thick handles so they do not double over when pulling the tooth. These are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large members so they do not bend when pulled, and of iron well-made, and toothed for moving them.
de la racine des dens	From the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains at the wound, you must place moistened cotton with butter for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 until the place is softened, then insert the tweezers called "algefri," making it appear like a sparrow's beak; and they should be shaped inside like a file.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with these tongs, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and put the tool called "althali", that is to say, pliers, this is its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with these, good; if not, then help yourself with all the tools, of which the shapes come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this tool with two handles, this is its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments which are in front of the reason for teeth, and this tool that resembles large tongs, here is its shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these tools be strong so they cannot break; and know that there are many instruments for teeth, and also others which are not counted. And the clever master finds his own instrument according to what his works and sickness show him, because there are such diseases where the old did not teach any instrument due to their diversity. And if one breaks something of the cartilage or other bones, then search among those tools which are necessary, as I have told you, and help yourself with gestures; this is its shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and hold well to hold the bone so it does not escape but can hold and remove it; then restore the place with appropriate medicine, and if there is rot in the bone and it is small, then remove it with all this tool.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear not according to the natural body shape and their appearance is ugly, especially in maiden women, it is necessary for you to know if the tooth is next to the tooth and not in the right place, and one cannot be set or smoothed: then cut; and if it is adherent with the tooth, take this tool of which here is its shape, resembling a small beak, and made of iron sharp at the end.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And hit it gently day after day for the hardness of the tooth and so as not to move the others; and if it is apparent that one can smooth it, then use this kind of file, of which here is its shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and file the tooth gently day by day little by little so that it does not fall too much; then smooth it at the end with any rasp; and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then smooth its sharpness until it is even so that it neither hurts the tongue nor impairs speech.
quant li dent lochent	When teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth are loose due to blows or falls, and the patient cannot chew food without choking, even after treating them with constricting medicines without success, you must constrain them with a gold wire. The wire should be neither too thick nor too thin according to the space between the teeth. If you need to align the teeth, take the wire and wrap it double around two healthy teeth. Then place the wires between the loose teeth, one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side. Start again with the wrapping up to where you began, holding your hand steadily so it does not move. Make sure the knot is at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then grasp the heads of the threads with a pair of pliers, and bring them together, and place them between the healthy teeth, so that it does not wound the tongue; then leave it as tight as possible until it can remain in place. If it comes loose or the thread breaks, hold it down with another thread; let it stay thus for its entire time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy ones, and the two molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it is replaced in its place little by little, as we have said; and let not those who are not wise and skilled meddle with it. And sometimes the shape of a cow's tooth bone is made and placed in the place where there is a gap, and it is tightened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut the tie of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this tie comes naturally from under the tongue at birth; or by accident of a healed wound. The procedure is such that you open the patient's mouth and hold their head in your lap, lift up the tongue; then grasp the nerve ligament near its root until the tongue is freed from its attachment. If there is hardness or stiffness there due to the healing of a wound, use an awl and cut through it at the root. Be careful not to cut too deep for the artery that lies underneath. Once you have done this, rinse with rosewater and sage, or cold water, then place a linen cloth under the tongue each night so that the tie cannot heal again
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding begins, crush vitriol and place it on the wound; and if the blood continues to flow, cauterize with a slow-burning cautery that is good for this purpose; then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it with red or black color or hard and the sick person does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre. And if it tends to ooze pus, and there is moisture, use a lancet and carefully make an incision with a spatula, and deliver it on one side and the other. If blood flows from your operation, put powdered vitriol on it until it stops flowing, then return to your operation until you remove all furuncle. Then wash the wound with sage and celandine, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes lumps called "godath" appear in the throat, properly known as tonsils. If they do not heal after treatment, as described earlier in this section, take note: if these are hard swellings with a dark red color and small size, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron; likewise for bleeding. But let it remain until it becomes black and ripe, then you can remove it, or else it may burst on its own. And if it is white in color and has a fine root, have your instrument ready to cut it out, but first make sure that the abscess feels warm to touch and is quiet.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Now make the patient sit before the sun, and let his shoulders be in your hand, and let him open his mouth and let the servant take it between his hands, and press the tongue from below with all the instrument, of which this is the form; and it should be made of silver or subtle gold like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue against all this instrument,
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument available, then take the forceps,
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And let it be incised on one side and named on the other; and when you have cut one of the almonds, so cut the other according to the same manner, and afterward the patient should gargle with hot water and rue, and hyssop, and if blood flows, then the patient should gargle with water in which pomegranate peels or bay leaves have been cooked, and similar things, until the blood is stanched; then care must be taken until it is healed. And sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them then just like the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman who had an abscess that was almost inside her throat, namely an abscess of little sense; and I had nearly closed the entire throat so that she could not breathe due to the blocked passage, nor could she eat or drink, and would have died if left thus for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had grown so much that it had filled up the entire space inside.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hurried then and inserted a knife into one of the openings, then drew it out and removed a large portion of the boil; then I inserted the knife into the other opening in the throat, opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue; afterwards I inserted the knife into this abscess and cut off part of it, and only a little blood came out; thus the passage of the woman’s throat was cleared out, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I kept cutting away at that boil for a long time; but the boil kept growing back and filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large again. Then I cauterized it with a hot iron inside her throat: thus it remained without growing any further. And I left this region, and I do not know what God did with her afterwards.
de l’uve	And when you wish to treat a man or woman whose eye is inflamed externally, take some of the powdered plant called "maiden's breath" (*Veronica officinalis*) and mix it with the yolk of an egg; apply this mixture around the eye on the eyelids. Then take a bandage made of linen and wrap it around the head so that it presses gently against the eye, but not too tightly. Leave the bandage in place for three days and nights without removing it to allow the patient to sleep comfortably. After three days, remove the bandage and wash the eye with warm water. Then apply some of the ointment made from rose oil mixed with wax to the eye, taking care not to get any of the mixture into the eye itself. Repeat this treatment for nine days, during which time the inflammation should decrease and the eye become healthy again.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it extends towards the eyelid and it is inflamed and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below and thick and rounded, it is called "uvéa".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cut as we have said in the division and the cure does not help at all, and you see that the skin around it is quiet, and it is subtle, then you must scrape it; and those that are rounded together and not long; and they are sanguineous or dark colored or black, then you must avoid cutting them.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient from this.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it according to its appearance and length, you must make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eyelid, draw it underneath, and scrape it with one or two of the instruments I mentioned for cutting through two membranes.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut any more than the surplus that is beyond its natural limit; for if you cut more, you harm the voice and speech; and after incision, use what we have said in the incision of two testicles, until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears being cut, then you must use an instrument for cauterizing their sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of applying the cautery is hot and dry.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient places their head in your hand, and then you press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and pour on boiling water quickly, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in applying this instrument gently, here is its shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And at the top there is a small hollow where one puts the medication, as if it were a spoonful of the medicine, and places the instrument entirely on the eye humor. And the patient should lie on his side so that saliva and mucus runs out of his mouth instead of the medicine entering the throat or the eye. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour until you see it is darkened and the medication bites are apparent. And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument entirely with the cotton into the canal above until the cotton touches the eye humor. Do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry and fall off after four or five days. And if you need to restart the cauterization with medication, do so, and afterwards clean around the eye with cotton dipped in rose water, and clean what is around the medicine; and rinse with cold water and cure with gargarisms until healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is better than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, chamomile, lavender and similar herbs, and assemble them all together in one pot. And add some of these herbs to the pot and let it boil well covered with thick earth. And there should be an iron instrument in the shape of a small spoon inside the pot:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And let it be of silver or brass, and one of its ends should be placed in the patient's mouth until steam rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is killed; afterwards begin again often, until the eye dries up, and ensure that you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot boil, for many things can happen then; and do not do this further than the decline of a hot boil.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a sieve and put an egg-shell into the head so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; for the egg-shell does not let steam burden the mouth, and this is good treatment together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times something sharp like a bone or fish spine, or any other thing gets stuck in the throat; so it is necessary that you remove what you can see and press the tongue with the instrument towards the sun until you see the object move. And what you cannot see but is stuck in the throat must be made to vomit by the patient before the food becomes cooked in the stomach; perhaps then the object will come out through vomiting. Or else the patient should swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a piece of lettuce root, or a small piece of dry bread; and tie one thread to the sponge, and then swallow it. And when it reaches the location, it will rise up, and then you can pull it out. And if it does not come out from what we have said, then take an instrument made of lead in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the instrument should be curved at its end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have its top lifted up. And make sure not to touch the epiglottis with it, nor push the bone too far in, but move the instrument gently until the patient feels where the object is stuck; then have them insert the instrument deeper or pull it out evenly until the object comes out completely.
de la sansue de la gorge	de la sansue de la gorge
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No bloodletting is done, as I said in the division, through medicinal treatment; and if that does not help, then observe the throat of the patient towards the sun, when you press the tongue with the instrument I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see a vein, then tie it gently all around with a small thread or with fine tongs that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if bleeding does not help, take a heated sieve and place it in the throat of the patient, then place the end of the sieve into hot iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is seized by water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, pour it in without letting them swallow, and move it with their hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it falls.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida using the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	The manner of the fumigation is thus: take a pot that has live coals within it, and let the pot's cover be pierced with a small hole in its center, through which insert the head of the instrument. Then cast your fumigation into the pot, and have the patient place the end of the tube in their mouth, closing their mouth tightly so that no smoke escapes but reaches deep down to the sinus; and the sinus will fall now, and if it does not fall, then recommence the fumigation many times. Let the patient abstain from drinking water and eat salty foods and suffer thirst.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which to treat the cinder is this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved tweezers for entering the throat. It should resemble a goose's bill and have sharpness like a file so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go. And here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses exist, according to what is remembered here from one and the other in this book, and they are diverse in both perforation and incision; and there are two ways [to treat them], the first being similar in appearance, and those that hold moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for places where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head differ from those at the base, and the ones on fatty tissue differ from those that occur in joints, and each should be judged individually.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And there are abscesses which one should not pierce until the bowels have completed their movement; and there are some that must be pierced when they have grown large, even if they do not complete according to their course, such as those near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses occur near joints and are left until they burst open, sometimes the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is near the main limb, if you delay its perforation until it's mature, it will harm the main limb. If it's near the base, pierce it before it matures. Do not pierce a ripe abscess without completing digestion, except for those near the base to prevent it from breaking inside and forming a fistula that cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	"And you should know the hour of piercing an abscess that is dead according to its fulfillment, and that is when the pain has ceased, and the separation of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and from softening and hardness at the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should make the perforation where it depends more hanging down than the abscess, and where it opens most; and let the perforation be long enough for the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and near nerves and arteries, and in all places smooth without fold."
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	When it pleases to rain upon that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in its mature stage, it is good that you let the incision remain until it has consolidated with completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	But if you prick it before its time, the body will be filled with its venom, and it will be full of much filth; and sometimes the edges and depth become hardened.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there is any abscess that should be opened according to its size in relation to the body, depending on what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you should make small holes for small abscesses, small incisions; and for large abscesses, large holes and many slits according to the size of the abscess; and there are such abscesses where it is necessary to press down with a heart-shaped probe or cover; when they have become as dry as parchment and weakened, then one should proceed like the treatment for boils: And there are those that are slit into three angles, and there are those where you cut like the miter valve, like abscesses of the angles; and there are those where a round incision is made, and other incisions with similar cuts.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, such as soft superficial abscesses, you should pierce them completely; and when the abscess is large, and it has collected much bile, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the bile at that moment, but draw out a part of it; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more; do this repeatedly bit by bit, until all the bile comes out. Similarly, if the patient is of weak constitution, or pregnant woman, or small children, or elderly men, do so.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	If the bile suddenly gushes out with the release of the abscess, which by chance might cause the patient's death, and you were unaware of it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	So proceed with this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then let the wound open up, and examine if the wound of the abscess is small. And if it's a clean cut, bring cloths made of linen or old cotton; and if it's a large abscess and there are many holes in it, then it is necessary to place in each one a bandage so that they come together against each other. And if you have cut off a piece of skin from the abscess and have removed it around, then it is necessary to fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and dress the wound with ointment until it's clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if evacuation of blood occurs during your operation, then bring cold water and basin, wet the cloth, and place it repeatedly on the bleeding area.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, bring gauze and bandage, and apply the powders mentioned earlier in this book to the area. If it is wintertime and the affected area is very sensitive, you should place warm moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil on it. If it is summertime and the area is fatty, you should place cloths moistened in cold water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, on it until the third day, as we have said before; then remove the bandage, cleanse and dress the wound until it heals completely.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	"And this one must know universally in the cure of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed with the cure of abscesses, and here is this chapter."
des soros	"of sores"
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Warts on the head come from small abscesses and are like warts that are found in linen, similar to those of a hen's egg, and there are many such similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	It has some that are fatty and such that have moisture like poultice; and there are also those that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery opposes it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting is that you examine all the instruments called "entromissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, strike it lengthwise on top.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied, scrape it clean without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, because it returns immediately if anything is left behind; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; if not, use water and salt, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and this will chase away what remains of the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then recommence with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third day, until you know well that nothing remains of the night; then dress the wound with suitable ointment until it is clean.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the boil is thick with flesh, cut it according to this form, long; sprinkle your feathers there, and scrape all around it, and make sure to draw out all that lies beneath its skin. And if the artery opposes you, do what I told you later.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And likewise do for a boil if it is hard, cutting and draining as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision of a hard and moist boil is easier because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these boils have a head without moisture, or the hard boil that I cut from the head of an old woman; and I found the boil like a hard, rough, white stone, unbreakable; and if one had tried to break it, they would have made just as much wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	Other boils coming to the head, especially those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of ears, should always be opened in the lowest place possible so that they may empty easily, and treat them as is necessary.
des scrophules	Scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and under the buttocks, and in the armpits, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body; they are many, and often interconnected.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	Each boil is properly inside its skin fold, like the one on the neck and the abscess on the head, as we have said; there are many types of these boils.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malignant which do not wish to yield to treatment
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one which you see with good placement to touch, and is similar in color to the skin, and moves on each side and is not hard near the nerves of the neck or the artery or vein, and is not deep; then you must cut it from above and scrape it from both sides, and expose the two lips of the heart, if necessary, as we have said for abscesses on the head; and treat it little by little, and make sure that you do not cut into the nerve or vein, and be careful not to use a curved or pointed knife, so that the hand does not slip, and do not cut too deeply, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, then place crushed vitriol powder or some powders that stop bleeding in the wound, and press on the wound; leave it until the abscess is soothed, the wound softened, and begins to decay.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your task until you complete it. Then check your index finger for any small scabs, cut them off and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, do not cut off that scab at its root but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall off without harm. Then dress the wound with Egyptian oil-soaked cotton, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut off the entire scab, then join together both lips of the wound and sew them now, since there will be no surplus left due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you must understand how to grasp its root and draw forth fire, then cut as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that hold excessiveness, pierce where it opens mortally; and pierce thus as the aforementioned one, dependingly, then bring forth tents with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then cure with anointing around flesh until it is healthy.
de squinance	The term "squinance" does not appear to have a standard medical definition or usage in medieval or early modern surgical texts. It is possible that it was a regional or colloquial term used by surgeons of the time, but without more context, it is difficult to determine its meaning with certainty. If you can provide additional information about where this term appears and in what context, I may be able to provide a more accurate interpretation.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	This quote translates to: "The ancients spoke and discussed the operation of cutting for the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who performed it, and this is written in their words."
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who are strangling/choking, it is necessary that the opening of the throat called "epiglottis" be cleared away; and one should not offer assistance by this method because all the veins and the membranes of the patient are hot in the mouth or throat or in two lumens.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the vein, it is necessary to lift the epiglottis to avoid suffocation from choking.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we do so below three circles or four, with a small cut across, between two circles or according to the quantity of the syfac's cut, not in the cartilage; and those places are suitable for cutting the epiglottis where there is no flesh.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat all around, then cuts into the heart until it reaches the pharynx; and avoids the blood vessels, if you see any, and then grasp the syfac as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the pharynx's artery that spurts fire from the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a short time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour of doubt about strangulation has passed, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart and sew it closed without including the cartilage; then apply medicines that promote healing until it is sound again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely closed up, and the patient is judged to be near death, and the harm is done
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow and breathes through the wound. And thus death is prevented. And so the ancients ordered that the wound should be left open until the malady has passed, which takes three or four days. And then they commanded that the wound be sewn up and dressed until it was healed. And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young woman took the knife and stabbed herself in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe. And I was called to heal her, but found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	Upon examining the wound, I found that blood had flowed from it, and I knew for certain that she had not cut her veins or opened a passage through which air could escape, but that wind was escaping through the wound
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed the wound, healing it until it was healthy. And the young woman suffered only temporary loss of voice, returning afterwards to her normal state. Therefore, I say there should be no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of a thick throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called 'throat hernia,' and it appears as a large swelling of the color of a bruise. It occurs most commonly in women, and there are two kinds: natural and accidental. The natural kind has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And accidents occur in two ways: one is similar to fatty tissue, and the other manner is like an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear involved, and it is not necessary to operate with fierce fire except in those cases that are small, and prove and search throughout the incision: if you find it as I described fat, and it cannot reach any vein, then cut it, just as one cuts fatty tissue, and scrape it completely, even its surface, if there is any; and examine everything thoroughly, and treat it as it should be treated until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	From us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many kinds of fatty tissue exist, all of which I will describe their similarities; and now I must explain the entire difference between fat and exudate.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is hot and has fever until boiling passes, and putrefaction is completed; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	Fatty tissue has no heat, fever, or pain, and contains fat that is its own sac, having the color of the body, starting like a bag and growing large; and there are two kinds, either fatty or moist, most having the colors mentioned in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of the knot, you must first examine and inquire with all the instruments called "trocar," according to what its shape will be as described in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of examining abscesses in the nose is that you take the moistest part of the abscess and gently twist your fingers little by little until you know that the probe has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the probe, and be careful lest anything spurt out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If there is running moisture, whatever its color, then cut it as I said for other abscesses; and if after the probe no moisture comes out, know that it is hard, so cut it in a cross shape, grasp it with forceps, gently scrape each side and guard the skin where it lies so that you draw it out whole with the root; and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	But if something remains, the nose will return many times; and if a little remains and blood troubles you, then cover the wound with some hot corrosive powders, and hold the wound together, and place warm soothing ointments for an abscess on it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed; and if the nose is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and cure what is around the flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	"And if the beating vein is against you or another, then hurry and apply the powder of vitriol ground, and let it lie for two or three days until the wound rots, and the ebullition of blood calms; then return to cut those that remain of the knot."
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the shapes of the foreign bodies inserted into [the body], and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. There are three squares called 'albaret', and one called 'breb'. They also come in three sizes to encircle fistulas: large, medium, and small. These are like the needles used for stitching sorceresses, made of citrine copper, iron, or silver. The ones that are yellow are more valuable, but black lead is preferred for encircling fistula cups. They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the forceps are in many likenesses: large, medium, and small. There are also forceps with two cups in three ways; those with three cups are likewise in three ways. Those with two cups and single-cup forceps are also of three kinds. All these are necessary in their places.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of this tool is sharp-edged, and there are some that only cut on one side, from which the hairs are scraped off so as not to nick the vein or nerve. These kinds of instruments are often hidden in hands, so the patient does not perceive them when opening abscesses; they come in three sizes: large, small, and medium, as you see. And such tools are used mainly in thick flesh, such as legs, arms, breasts, armpits, and similar places. Sometimes another tool is made that resembles a fist's cuticle, shaped like this, with which blood is wiped away.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	"And it is sometimes placed at the site where there is danger of cutting veins and arteries, and sometimes they are large in size:"
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to decay, appearing like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to treat them should do so according to this form from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape away the fat, and dress the wound with medicine inside it, then bring together the two lips of the wound to stitch, and care for it until it is healed. And if the nipple leans downwards, and is enlarged by its size as happens in women, then make two incisions above into the ribs through two similar slits; so that one holds onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.. Then scrape away the skin that is between the two lips and remove the fat, and prepare as we have said for stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the care until it is healed. And if it is not healed or if the incision is not complete because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment. Leave it until it has softened the remaining fat, then care for it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	Of armpit fistulas
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	"These fistulas that come under the armpits are of the type of hard scrofula with lumps, and some contain moisture."
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this shape, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when the entire lump in the fistula has been emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and heal it with appropriate ointment until it is sound."
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	"And if the fistula resembles scrofula, cut it like we have said for scrofula incisions; and if the wound gapes open, apply a caustic as we have mentioned before."
de la routure de l’artere	Of arterial rupture
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is injured and the skin above it is scorched, abscesses often form, and likewise when a vein bursts and an abscess forms. And one can recognize this thus: if it's for the artery, the abscess will be long and deep; you'll feel a pulling sensation with your fingers. If it's for the vein, there will be obvious swelling. It is foolish to cut into such an abscess, especially when it's under the armpits or angles or at the neck, or in many other places; these are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, one must avoid cauterization with fire, especially the head. For an abscess caused by arterial inflammation, make a long incision through the skin; open the wound widely and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it's exposed. Then insert a needle under one side and pierce it through to the other side. Tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I've shown you for extracting the two arteries in the temples. Then use an intromissoir to press on the point between the ties until the blood drains out, and remove the abscess. Then dress the wound with compresses so that the bandages remain clean. If the abscess is caused by a vein injury, then take hold of it with your hand, pierce a needle under the point you're holding, pass the thread through to the other side, tie the abscess as I've described, using one of the two knots at each end of the thread. If you're unsure that the stitches are secure, insert another needle along the entire length of the first stitch and tie it in four places. Then cut open the abscess until all the excess fluid drains out. Cut away the excess skin around the heart but leave the tied portion intact. Finally, apply a warm, moist compress soaked in wine and oil, then dress the wound with gauze and ointment until it's healed.
des apostemes des ners	"Abscesses of the nerves"
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, abscesses can come to the artery and vein, abscesses also come to the nerves when they are injured or from excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often to shoulders and hips, and in all places where there are joints, and it is the worst abscesses, their color seems like that of the body, and they are in many dispositions without pain; but when it is squeezed strongly, the patient feels pain, not deep within the body, but below the heart. It moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, nor up nor down. And one who is in joints should not be covered with iron: there might be contraction; and those that are on the head or forehead make the skin thin at the temples.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, take it with tongs and cut it at its root; if it is large, suspend it with a hook, scrape it out, then open it and sew up the wound. And treat it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	"Hanging boil sores"
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the belly and not elsewhere. It is an illness called 'fungus' because of its resemblance to mushrooms. The roots are thin but the heads are large; some are small and others very big. I saw a man who had two on his belly that resembled fungi more than anything else, with no difference between them. They were white and had fine roots, cracked open, and moisture flowed from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I weighed them and found one to weigh XVIII ounces and the other VI Z., and the work of the incision is such that you should observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a subtle root; then cut it with a wide spatula, and have the cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For during cutting, there are often too large flows of blood, and if the blood overcomes you, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the incision of iron, then take a well-made string of lead, and tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; then tighten it, and do not cease pulling on the string of lead until you cut the artery, and remove it without effort. And if the roots are large, there is fear in cutting itself for the belly, but you can well cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return. Then dress the wound, and ensure that you do not cut the thelul which is of fox color, poor sense, and produces milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	"For this is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer later on."
quant li boude ist fuer	"When the boil bursts"
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the swelling of the belly comes from cautery of a wound or split of the bladder, and is on the abdomen, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what is before mentioned, or from flatulence; and if it's from the rupture of the bladder and the outlet of bile, then the color of the abscess is like the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and there are various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	"And if it is due to the outlet of the intestines, then it appears more diverse. When pressed between two fingers, it pops up and then returns. Sometimes it is hard, and grows larger at the entrance of the anus with great effort."
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is light and well-defined when you press it with your hand, it does not constrict at all; and if it is due to blood, then the abscess appears large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and its appearance tells you whether it is from arterial or venous blood, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If thou must leave the treatment
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or for the eye, thou must command the patient to stretch out his arm straight, then grasp all around the wound; then have him lie down smoothly between thy hands, then go around the place that thou hast marked with the spatula, then stretch half of the abscess above completely; then bind it around with a strong thread or a tightly twisted silk cord, and let the knot be well tied; then open half of the abscess stretched out upon the ligature, and insert thy index finger, and seek the intestine; if thou findest it caught by the ligature, untie it and place the intestine outside the belly; and if thou findest the eye, take it with a hook and cut off the superfluity; and if the artery or vein opposes thee, go gently around, then return to thy work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and insert the two needles crosswise where thou hast made pierced; then hold the abscess in four places upon the needles, and if it swells, remove the needles, and let the place remain until it rots, and scrape off the dead flesh; or cut it when it is ripe and rotted, then dress it as it ought to be done, and open the abscess as we have said; then extract the blood or moisture that thou findest, then dress the place as it ought to be done, and sew up the place.
dou chancre	"Regarding cancer"
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	"We have discussed the appearance of cancer and how to treat it with medications in our division. We must also be cautious when treating cancerous ulcers in the marrow or large ones that are difficult to excise, such as those found in the breast, thigh, and similar locations. The ancients advised removing them completely when they first appear, but once they become large and old, it is not advisable to approach them as I have never seen anyone cured of cancer, nor has anyone else before me."
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when the cancer is located in an area where it can be removed, as we have said, you should purge the patient with black bile once or twice. Then let him fast if he shows signs of repletion. Next, prepare a good operating site to perform the surgery. Then grasp the cancer with your thumb and index finger, cut it off from all sides, and remove it completely without leaving anything behind. Allow the blood to flow freely, wipe the wound clean with your hand or any other object, and if bleeding from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. Then treat the wound with other remedies until it is healed."
de ydropisie	Dropsey
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have previously spoken in the division about the similarities of dropsy, how water is gathered, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: only 'eclites' is mentioned; and one must not touch with iron in these two semblances: namely tympanites and yposarche, for it is deadly; therefore when you treat this semblance of dropsy called 'eclites' with medicines, and the cure does not help, look if the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, such as wind and bloating and similar things; do not touch them with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see that the patient has great strength, and they have no other disease but dropsy alone, and they are neither too young nor too old, then you should act thus: lift the patient upright onto your hands, and the ministers press the belly, pushing water towards the lowest part of the breast, then take the spatumile espinous according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And pierce with a point, but not so deeply that it reaches the intestines when inserted, lest it cause injury. Then observe if dropsy has entered towards the intestines: if so, make an incision three fingers' breadth below the navel on the right side; if dropsy is due to liver disease, make the incision on the left of the navel; if due to worms, on the right. Ensure the patient does not lie upon the incision so superfluities do not flow into that weak spot. Then pierce all the skin with this instrument and withdraw it. Place your hand at the level of the skin and fat, as in flaying, to the depth of a fingernail or somewhat less. Then pierce the fat until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is the location of water. Withdraw the spatula and insert this instrument; this is its form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a thin silver chain, and is made of bronze or lead, light, with a small hole at the bottom part; and on one side, three holes; and two on another side, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers use to cut a feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And at the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it now descends onto the instrument; empty it then by one half or a third part, for if you empty more than is needed at that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolving of his spirit from the wound, or he falls unconscious, or approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulse; then draw out the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now by the heart that stops up the hole that is on the phlegm, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then recommence the instrument the next day, if you see the patient enduring these things, and draw out a small quantity of water; do this for several days, and guard yourself from being too hasty so that it does not remain but a drop of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water on it, cure it with hot sand burial, often rubbing or bathing in sunlight, and dye of drinking; and cure it with drying medicines until it is dry, cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoppage of the wand
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without a hole in the penis, or with a small hole, or one not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary, pierce it at once with a very fine spatula according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then place a thin plug of lead into the hole and tie it securely for three or four days. When it wants to urinate, remove the plug and let it do so, then replace it. Sometimes this may not be necessary, as the urine will not leave through the closed opening.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose hole is small should use the lead plug medication, as we have said, so that it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	They who do not have the opening in its proper place are blocked, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot empty themselves because the matter cannot reach the bladder, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of performing the operation is that the patient lies on his back, then stretch out the head of the penis and cut it off like the shape of a pen's nib so that the hole falls in the middle as it should; but be careful not to cut too much, because many times blood comes out, and if this happens, then stanch the blood with whatever stops bleeding, and cure the wound until it is sound.
des pustules de la verge	of the sores of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these albatrosses appear on the member, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are malignant ones and non-malignant ones; so you must take them with a subtle pincer, cut and clean all, then place moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment; then treat with diaphoretic ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the wound is malignant, of foul color and foul-smelling, then you must bring fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it out, and if the wound is on the penis, with part inside the foreskin and part outside, then you must first remove the flesh that is inside; and when it is sewn up, then treat the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, the head of the penis may not be properly healed, and blackness and corruption come to its inside and the vulva; so you must cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made from pomegranate peel and resin mixed with honey and flour, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is an onset of bleeding, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And the cauteries help in two conditions together: namely, for the flow of blood and corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you should insert or conduct through it a reed of lead, and let the patient urinate through it. And when the skin at the head of the penis that occurs in those who have not been circumcised becomes hard due to wound or abscess, then you must scrape it with the shaving instrument until the foreskin is loosened and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides. And if it is difficult to separate them, then you should scrape some off the head of the penis and skin with the spatula, then gently dissect between the two, and place a subtle linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that it may soften again.
de la circoncision	"of circumcision"
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	"Circumcision is not a continuous dismemberment like other wounds; nonetheless, when we perform this operation willingly and properly on children, it is necessary to make the best and easiest work for salvation."
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	"I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for it was not used in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience."
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	"Because I have seen most masters and senior surgeons performing circumcision with only one dal, without forceps, and using just one novacula; thus it happened that the skin remained torn because there were two layers, and sometimes they cut the upper one and leave the lower one."
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	"Otherwise, they cut it again, and the pain is doubled; moreover, at the time of cleansing the wound from the dal, the point of the member is not securely protected; also, during cleansing of the nail, sometimes the iron slips and damages the work, and many times it happens that there is no need for cleansing, which I have seen."
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	"Concerning the cleansing that is done with forceps and with the entire length of thread, I have found through experience its goodness because the forceps cuts evenly both above and below."
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand thus and cut evenly in one single movement; but let the thread be well pulled tight around the skin; and so it should happen that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are doing nothing but tying the thread around the stick only, then make him laugh in all ways you can; then make him stand upright between your hands, and hide the threads between your hands or under your feet so the child sees neither them nor any of the tools; then place your hand on the stick and blow into the heart, and pull it upwards until the head of the stick is inside; then clean it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the left sign with a double thread, then tie it under one knot to the other; and hold it with two fingers by the second knot at the wrist and the index finger, and cut between the two knots, then quickly raise the heart up and pull the head of the stick; then let the blood flow from pocket to pocket, for that is the matter; and put powder on it and over the powder a cloth stuck together with a mixture of cooked egg yolk not diluted with rose water, well confited with good fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and treat him further until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	"The shape of the forceps for cleansing should be like this: the two jaws should be thin and sharp, and the jaws should be as large as the middle finger, evenly."
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	"The error in cleansing is when the skin inside is stuck to the incision; therefore, it is necessary that you stretch it with your fingernail before the edges stick together and cut it evenly. And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with forceps and cut it."
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	"And if it has passed three days and the skin underneath the penis is swollen, let it be until the inflammation is calmed down, then carefully scrape it off; cut as much as you can without damaging the penis itself."
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Then treat the wound with powder for sudden wounds, as we have mentioned in our treatment of powders. And if you cut too much from the skin and it goes upwards, it will not harm at all. Then treat it as we have said until it is healed."
dou retenement de l’urine	"Regarding the retention of urine"
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is caused by obstruction due to a stone, or congealed blood, or mucus, or flesh newly born, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division. If urine is not released and you see that there is an obstruction because of a stone that has grown or lodged at the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be made to crouch on his knees; let his feet rest on his back, extend his belly on the part above his back, and have the patient hold himself up as much as he can. Then the neck of the bladder will be compelled to expel the stone upwards, so that urine is released. If it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using all the instruments called "syringe," which is shaped like this: let it be made of thin silver tubing, light like a bird's feather; let its tube be one and a half palms long, and let it be sharp at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Now the method of issuing urine is as follows: take a doubled thread and tie it to the top of a wad of wool or cotton, then put the thread's end into the syringe. Cut off any excess wool from the wad, then place it up to the syringe's tip. Then anoint the syringe with oil or butter mixed with egg yolk. Have the patient sit on a chair, and gently raise their bladder and penis using moistened oil and olive oil. Then lightly insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis upwards towards the navel. Next, push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, which the patient will feel when it's empty. Then pull out the thread along with the wool wad, allowing urine to flow along with it. After that, remove the wad and continue using the syringe until the bladder is emptied, relieving the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	Maladies de la vessie
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	"If blood or pus comes into the bladder, or if there is putrefaction gathered there, and you see that water and medicines are being distilled, then use all the instrument called 'clasp', and this is its form:"
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the holes raised so that the medicine cup fits tightly without any addition, so that if needed, it can draw out moisture and introduce what is necessary; and when you see your medicines entering the bladder, place the spout of the siphon in the moisture, and draw out the fluid inside; then you will draw out the moisture into the siphon, and then strongly push the tube back in; thus the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle enema used to administer an enema to the bladder:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or brass, and the spout is higher; and below there is one seam where the tube falls; then take a bladder from a sheep and put in the moisture with which you will enema the bladder, then tie it between two breasts firmly with doubled thread, and heat this moisture on the fire; then place the tip of the enema into the tube, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture arrives at the bladder, so that the patient feels it has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then strongly insert the thread into these holes, then join the circle as one joins a sieve, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it onto the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	"de la pierre"
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	"We have previously stated in the division the methods of stone, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have mentioned the difference between stone lodged near the kidneys, and all its signs, and in which stone one must operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you this clearly and briefly."
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	"I say that stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder appearing like water in its subtlety; and it makes the patient's penis appear harenaeous, and he feels great pain and frequently urinates, and then stiffens; and many of these cases have a foundation; and the healing of children is easy until they are four years old, and it is very difficult for the elderly, and it is moderate for youths, for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one."
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, first it is necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For sometimes it obstructs the stone-searching.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and lower them and move them below so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it ascends from its high place; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands are under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward; then seek and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall at the touching of all, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is fully grown; and put it in his anus, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press on it with your finger, and push it out where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands that he stretch out his right hand upwards and remove the skin that is below the thighs in the part where the cut is made, then insert the spatula thus shaped.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make an incision between those that are between the thighs and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left hip bone; and let it be straight upon the stone, and your two fingers always on the fundament, and let the knife cut so that it is wide at the front and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure will cause the finger that is on the fundament to slip out without labor; and know that there are such stones that have angles and edges: they are difficult to remove; and there are also those that are smooth, resembling a lentil, and rounded, from which the exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For those that have angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not slip out, then you must extract with forceps that are like a file at the end, to move the stone so that it does not escape; or you put beneath it a subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot thus catch it, then widen the hole around the passage, and if blood flows out, stop it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, first place the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then let it slip forth, and afterwards extract the smaller ones if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it [the dislocation] is very large, then it must be cut deeper, making a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	But if two things happen to the patient: either he dies or urine flows constantly from where the wound cannot heal; nonetheless, strive to draw it [the dislocation] out with forceps or cut it into pieces until you have completed your work. Then dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bandage it, and place a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine (or oil and rose water and cold water) on top to soothe the inflamed abscess. Then bind the patient tightly around his neck, and do not remove the bandages until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie him, then wash the wound very well with oil and water, then apply the ointment of diacynthion and the ointment of basilicum until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses appear in the wound and corrosion occurs, and blood clots form in the bladder, causing urine to be retained in such a way that it flows without control: then boil some of your own dough in the wound, and remove that blood, for if it remains there, it will harm the bladder and corrupt it. Then wash the wound with water and rue and celandine, and aid him [the patient] in all ways that you know until he is healed. And it is necessary that during every session of treating him, you tie his two thighs together, and apply medicine to its proper place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it lies in the passageway of the penis and is stuck there, preventing urine from flowing out; then follow the treatment I mentioned earlier, cutting it many times until it is pierced through by this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tried it this way.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron awl shaped thus and having three prongs forged into one stake:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move backwards into the bladder. Then insert the drill into the penis gently until it reaches the stone. Turn the drill in your hand against the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from the other side. Then urine will come out soon. Finally, press your hand on what remains of the stone that is still inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it breaks soon and is flushed out with the urine, then the patient is cured. But if you cannot do this for some reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it. Then cut the penis near the stone between the two threads. Remove the stone by pulling it out, untie the threads, clean the wound of any congealed blood, and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	Of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that stones are dislocated in women's cases, and if it happens sometimes, its treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second one is that one cannot find a knowledgeable woman who exposes herself to doctors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is such that sometimes one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman lies deeper than the stone of the man, therefore a deeper cut must be made there, with great fear involved. And if you need assistance in this matter, then it becomes necessary for you to procure a competent midwife, and if none can be found nearby, seek one who practices subtle arts; present her with an intelligent female companion knowledgeable about women's lives or a woman familiar with some aspects of the art, instructing her to perform what you command regarding the examination of the stone. Pay close attention whether the woman is a virgin: then she must place her hand on the fundament and search for the stone. If she finds it, she should press down upon it with her hand, and recommend that she place her hand in the patient's vagina, feeling and pressing strongly with her left hand over the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then it is necessary to move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder downwards until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut against the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the thigh bone where it appears displaced, and feel for the stone in that part; and do not move your finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first; then insert the knife into the incision if you feel the stone so close to the wound that the stone can come out fire, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large and sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Know the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood faints, then put powdered vitriol in place and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work until the stone is out, and have tools ready as I told you for extracting stones from men to help you in your task; and if the blood faints and it is from the artery that has been cut, then apply powder on the place and tie it with bandages and do not begin again cutting there, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient dies; then dress the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the wound can bear it, then return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	Here is a possible translation for "de hernie carnouse":
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	A hernia is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white seed that is under the heart of a cock, which contains the egg; and it is called "seed," and sometimes it is properly inside the skin of the egg, so that one might think it is another egg. It is the skin of the cock between the white seed that we have mentioned, and this only happens if there was no pouch.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the cause of this hernia is weakness in the cocks, which causes this matter to spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either it's colored declining to yellowish, or it's without redness, or black, or watery white, and such things happen more often; these are the signs by which one recognizes this gathering, for if it is of a whitish hue as we have said, then the abscess is ripe, about as long as the shape of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess is ripe with part of the yolk, and therefore one thinks that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the whitish surface, it is felt quite well. Therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test it on all parts of the square intromitter, as its shape is shown here before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Therefore, based on what comes out after squeezing, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cut it with iron, the patient should be sound according to his strength and the fullness of his body. Then lay him on his back, upon something slightly high, and put many cloths under him. Then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs where the heart is located. Then take the spatula lightly, and cut the skin among the ribs near the thumb, and let your cut be straight downwards, dividing the skin until it reaches the white fat, and scrape it subtly according to your strength. Then pierce the fat full of water with one wide hole, and drain all the water, then put on your bandages, and stretch the fat upwards; And do not touch the heart's ribs, but only the fat itself; cut everything or in pieces softly, so that if you don't cut it smoothly, water will return. And if the egg slips during your work, fix it back in its place when you have completed the work on the fat. Then sew together the two parts of the heart's ribs with a stitch, then heal it like other wounds until it is sound.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the egg is corrupted by some other disease, then ligate the vessels that are suspending it to stop the flow of blood. Then cut through the entire suspension ligament and remove the egg, treating the wound as previously described.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If water collects in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; cut off the other part as you did the first evenly, then squeeze out the blood, and place in the wound clean wool moistened in rose oil. And place another wool moistened in wine and oil on it, and lay doubled cloths over it, and tie it all together according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and fill them with wool lint according to this shape and they should be sewn together at the waist of the breeches, and one of the heads takes up the fundament up to the back, and the other at the fist joint; and the two ends over the two angles, and all the restraint is gathered in the loop of the breeches. And sometimes this branch is treated with cautery instead of iron cutting, and it is that you take one subtle cautery knife and cut into the skin of the joints, and heat it up as we have said so that the white sac containing the water is exposed; then take the cautery in this form and pierce that sac several times, and scrape it clean with this hot subtle cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut in all the ways that you can, until you have removed everything; and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more beneficial; and move carefully to avoid blood loss, and make sure the surgical cuts are clean; and if anything goes against you, whether it's a boil or blood loss or something else, then treat what goes against you, according to what is written before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its harshness, perform perforation as I instruct you. And when you are certain that the water of rain is present there, according to the signs we have mentioned earlier, then have the patient sit on a raised seat; cut the boil at its base with a broad spatula and insert the perforation tool deep into the body; make the opening large enough so all the water flows out. Then place cotton on the site and tie it, leaving it for the rest of the water to flow out. Then dress the wound until it is healed. And if the bandage does not allow the water to exit through the mouth of the wound, you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat hydrops, whose shape is shown earlier. Widen the wound opening and know that the water will return and gather again after six months or so. Once it has gathered as before, the patient will recover.
de l’aposteme des coions	"Abscess of the thighs"
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	You should know that in the case of this branch [of medicine], there is fear and more often misdiagnoses, therefore it seems to me that it would be better if one left it alone. I will tell you the workings and similar things about an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many gangrenes occur in the body, and especially on the testicles; and this happens often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to be known that an abscess comes about from sharp and burning acidity, which spreads through the joints or by percussion; and the colour of the abscess follows the colour of the body; and it does not cause pain, and it is a serious abscess; and sometimes there are abscesses that are hard and full of pus, with yellowish colour, and some come from an artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it comes from an artery, it is recognised by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it with your two fingers; and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	That which comes from swelling of a vein is known by its disposition upon expressing the touch of two fingers, and one can well make an incision upon this kind, and on others; and it is that you cut along the joints, then stretch the egg upwards, and strike off the white skin, and free it from all around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already solid with these fresh wounds, then you must draw out the egg and cut it open; and if it is air in the face or in those that are inside the vessels, then you must remove all of this tension completely and roundly cut the opening.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	"And if the birth canal is located at the back, then you must cut all of it and remove the womb, as we have said."
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And once your task is completed, fill the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then apply other dressings until it heals."
de l’aposteme des coions	"Abscess of the thighs"
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling wool, with softening of the joints, and the patient cries out when he walks; and the treatment for this disease is just as fearful as the one mentioned before, yet we will tell you about its workings according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then place the suspension band for the joints below your two arms, close to all the vessels near the groin; tie it with a knot and stretch it firmly. Then cut with a wide, sharp scalpel across the vessels until they are exposed, and scrape away from each side as we have described in the extraction of arteries in the temples. Then insert a needle with double thread where the vein first appeared, and tie it at both ends. Cut evenly down the middle according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture. Then dress the wound like others where an arrow has entered, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes one of the joints. For through this there comes no harm, but if the vein comes from all vessels, then draw out both joints from all vessels; so that the bone does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and let them dry and be unable to help.
de la routure dou syfac	"about the dislocation of the hip socket"
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrence of this rupture comes from the bursting at the side, or the stretching over the belly in the region of the hips, causing the intestines to descend from that tear towards one of the kidneys; and this tear is either in the side, or due to stretching of it, and these two ways come from many causes: such as blows, falls, coughing, lifting heavy weights, and similar things; and the sign when it's from the stretching of the side, is that it happens little by little over a long time, not suddenly; and the abscesses are even until deep down because the side presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	"And when it occurs due to separation of the hip socket, there is sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess appears diverse and prominent under the skin, due to the exit of the intestines and the body behind the hip socket."
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	"Sometimes loops of intestine also descend with it, becoming trapped and causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed upon."
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	"And in these iron treatments, one should avoid cautery."
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	You will do the operation thus: instruct the patient to put their hand inside the wound if they can reach it. Then have them lie on their back with their legs raised. Next, expose the kidney by cutting away the long connective tissue covering it. Then insert uncines into the wound according to your needs to open it enough for the kidney to emerge. Next, peel off the fat around the kidney until the white fibrous capsule is exposed on all sides. Insert your index finger into the space behind the kidney between the two layers of the renal fascia and separate them. Then use your right hand to press down on the kidney while using your left hand to lift up the fascia towards the spine, exposing the entire kidney towards the flank. Instruct your assistant to hold the kidney up and release any attachments behind it. Check with both hands if there is any bowel adhering to the fibrous capsule of the kidney, and if you find any, push it back into the abdomen. Then take a needle with a thick thread made from several strands and insert it into the rear part of the fascia after the kidney. Cut off the excess threads so that there are four remaining. Tie them together in a cross-shaped manner to secure the fascia underneath the kidney, using two tight knots. Next, tie the loose ends of the threads tightly with two knots to prevent any vessels from entering and causing an abscess. Then place the knots according to the first knot along the length of two fingers away from it. After these knots, leave enough space for the kidney underneath the ribs equal to the span of one's hand. Finally, close the wound by applying moist wool soaked in oil to the incision and tying it with the thread mentioned earlier.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	"And sometimes the white bone of the hip socket that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision to prevent bleeding."
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and he lets the lien fall until it falls by itself; and if it takes time to fall, then let it be warmed with hot water, and place what we have said on it until it falls; then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Here is a possible translation for "de hernie carnouse":
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	I never saw anyone in this region who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Moreover, the ancients said that it is done like the branch that grows together with the vine, so you tie the vessels lightly after cutting above them slightly below; then cut into the middle and treat the abscess from what opens until the vessels fall away; and treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the anus as we have said, and the area opens up; and no part of the intestines should come out from it, but if some do come out, it is little matter, and repair all hours; and nevertheless if it remains too long at this point, then the wound becomes enlarged or syphilitic until the intestines come out; and this happens due to the extension of the syphilis that is in the anus as we have said, because it is extended, then the area becomes softened and swollen and opens up; and its treatment is by cautery as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way: and it is that the patient lies often on their back between your hands, then cut the area of the rupture swollen from wide according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the syphilis that is under the skin that ensues, then take the rod and place it over the apparent area of the syphilis; and press it deep into the belly, then cut the two apparent areas of the syphilis on top of the head of the rod, and cut one and the other; then extract the head of the rod, and do not cut the syphilis nor extend the wound or anything else as I have taught you in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines; then treat it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse it and dress the wound until it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	Gangrene is contained and does not show itself in the wound, and cauterization is muted in this area, being closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	due to softening of the skin around the anus
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the anus in some men becomes softened because the tissues inside are softened, and it is unpleasant to see. And when you want to treat it, make the patient lie on their back and cut away the softened skin from the natural skin. Then bring the two lips together with one stitch and if necessary, sew the excess softened skin at three or four places firmly. Then cut between the stitches and treat it like other wounds until it is healthy, and remove the sutures.
dou chastrement	of castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that castration is prohibited in our law, and therefore I would like not to speak of it in this book; and there are only two reasons why it might be necessary: one is for the doctor to respond when asked about it, and know its treatment; and the other because we often have need of castration for certain animals to aid us, such as goat and sheep and cat and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one that we do by attraction, make the beast sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hanging, then grasp them with your hand until they are relaxed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of castration by cutting: it is necessary that you tie the beast and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut each testicle once after you have properly bled them; leave a small piece of skin and tissue around the vessels; this method of castration is quicker than that done by attraction, because in attraction some part of the testicles may remain, causing the beast to desire lust; then dress the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	on Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermafroditism exists in two ways among men: one way is that between the two testicles opens also like the figure of a woman's nature, where there is hair, and sometimes it tears during urination.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, who have on their pubis both a penis and two testicles
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for both men and women is to dress the joined parts together and treat them like other wounds; but in the second manner, for those men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of tentingene (i.e., tentingene)
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is a joined wound on the natural part that is too ugly to see; some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you cut away the excess of the tentigene with your hand or with tweezers, and dress it lightly; and do not go too deep, lest bleeding occur, then treat it with other treatments until it heals. And there is another wound that appears at the mouth of the womb, the anus, and sometimes protrudes like a cow's udder, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow-like disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must cut it, as we have described the incision, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Correction is necessary when the nature of woman's body is not pierced, or if the hole is small; and it is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that has occurred there; or it is caused by adhered flesh, or by a thin, thick, or dense membrane, and it extends into the marrow, or on the sides, below, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, childbirth, sometimes causing infertility; and recognition of this condition is by examination of the vulva.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the blockage appears nearby, you should search with your fingers or your staff.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If there is a thin membrane nearby at two fingers' breadth, then act quickly and do as follows: place your two index fingers together, with the woman lying on her back, legs spread apart; then press the two labia firmly until the thin membrane covers the blockage; then take wool, dampen it in oil, apply it to the area, and let the woman lie flat each day so that it does not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sinew is hard and thick, you must scrape it like a leaf of laurel.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the boil is flesh-born, suspend it with hot water and scrape it; and have medicines that stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense mixed with egg yolk. Then apply a bandage of wide linen so that the wound cannot heal. And let this be done for a long time, then cover it with dry linen cloth. Then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	But when flesh-born matter comes in the wound, it must be scraped according to this manner, unless it is an inflamed abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an inflamed abscess that is in the wound, one should not touch it with iron.
des emorroides	"For hemorrhoids"
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually do not bleed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard. We have already mentioned in the division their likenesses, signs, and now I will say those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are deeply buried in the marrow, and cannot be felt, then it is not cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which can be felt, those can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then raise the altar with forceps, and grasp it at its roots with tweezers, then sprinkle powder of medicines that stop bleeding, such as acacia and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things; then place her feet at the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water. And if there is bleeding, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall nuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not so, then apply cupping glasses to the back and breasts without pricking; then take linen, and wet it in plantain juice or in buckthorn juice with old wine, and apply to the location.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, then cure the location with ointment until it is clean; and that called "albathir" is red, resembling a bitter apple head, so you should cover it as I have described the telu; and then cure until it is clean.
des apostemes de la marris	Of boils of the belly
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the flesh, such as cancer and bony abscesses, herpes and boils, fistulas and hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must say in this treatise about the hot abscess that occurs in the flesh, which is not one of those that grow like boils; and if you wish to know the work of iron, look whether the abscess is hot at its beginning and filled with heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but make it burn until the pain is alleviated; and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats where they can recline, and support their back and bring their feet together at the level of the knee; and let their thighs be spread apart, and put their arms under their knees, and tie them securely with a good tie; then suck out the bile towards the right side, and introduce the instrument with which one operates on the mouth of the bladder, about which there will come later its form; and it is necessary that when you are introducing this instrument, you first insert the reed to know the depth of the bladder, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, nor burn the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the bladder with rags, so that the instrument does not hurt them; and it is necessary that they put the horn of the instrument above, and that they grease the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the abscess opens, and it is cut with a soft hand, then you must cover it at the head, with a warm linen cloth; and when the bowels are empty, then you must put moistened bandages in oil of rose or dried green oil into the wound; and place the bandage far from the wound, and put behind it clean linen soaked in water or myrrh cooked until boiled; then treat after two days with suitable ointment until healed; and sometimes lift the bandage and the wound by an enema of water and honey, then of water in which lilies and coltsfoot are cooked.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is full of matter, you must beware of cauterizing with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is first necessary that the midwife knows the form of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman straining downwards, and desires to smell the air: then the child hastens to come out. Know then that this childbirth is according to nature's form, and the waters issue from its head, with the afterbirth. And when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on her belly so that the child comes out quickly; for when it settles on its head, the afterbirth is with it, and the womb is cleansed of its superfluities by good cleansing. And one that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it sometimes happens that [the dislocation] comes upon his feet, and the body or shoulder is fiery, and the hands, or it comes upon his belly, or sometimes, and occasionally they are turned over his neck, and by other evil forms; thus it is necessary for the bath attendant to be wise and skillful in these matters, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help [the patient].
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out naturally on its head and the woman is giving birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a stool or have women hold her up; and let the nature of oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then put the little spatumile between her thighs, of which this is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and tear open the membranes and scrape with its nail until the moisture inside comes out; and press on the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then the woman must be cleansed with a powder made of fenugreek mixed with oil of sesame; then she should inhale the fumes of costus and sneeze, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will be born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out fiery, then you must gently and gradually push them back in; and if they cannot be put back in, then place the woman on a seat, and raise her feet high; then tip the seat onto the ground, making sure that she does not fall with the tipping; and if the hands still cannot go in and the child dies, then cut off the hands at the joint mentioned above and extract the child, and set everything back in place evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the childbirth upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes forth upon its feet, then lift it up gently; and then turn it a little by little until it is even; then take one of its feet and extend it gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it jumps up to the thighs, then command it to grasp [itself], and make it sneeze with condition; if it leaps forth, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he does not jump as we have said, then turn him bit by bit until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not leap forth as we have said, then take musk, aloe, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind them together in one mortar; and put this ointment on the nature of the woman inside and outside, then make her sit in hot water up to below the ribs; and when she is moistened below, give her a collar of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will now leap forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	place the exit of the child upon her knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, then the midwife places her hands softly and gently on him. Then she supports him on his neck, and let his feet hang down, and lies him softly on the bed. And folds her hands softly and gently, then takes the hands onto the belly, and removes the cushions from beneath until it is arranged downwards. And if the child does not move, take his feet and move them vigorously, then move your belly upwards, then place your hands there; and raise the child softly and gently; and command the woman to bear down until the child issues forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the exit of the child that comes from the side with one hand hanging
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to try to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and forcefully raise her legs. Then apply the mustard plaster that I have described; and if she does not give birth, then seat her on the chair, then attempt to bring back the hand. And raise the child according to its natural position, and make it sneeze, and command the woman to bear down until the child issues forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the exit of the child upon her neck, with its hands spread out and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the servant take his hand, then turn it little by little, and the eye lightly; and when it is even, so put upon the natural muscillaige of altee and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little; and when you have done this, then let her sit on the seat, and instruct her to sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all that remains of the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When the fire comes in this manner to all of the membrane, then cut the membrane with your fingernail until the moisture is emptied; and if the child falls on its face and neck, then cut from the throat so that it is not retained, and the child dies; then put the child inside until you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to sneeze several times: then it will come out easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	about the exit of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes even three or four; this is not a rare thing, and it happens infrequently.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	There are two strange things, and they do not live long if unnamed; I know this, that they can be multiplied, and are hated by the thief who divides them, which is attached to the throat; and sometimes they also come out naturally like a tooth, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out screaming, treat them as we have said, and let the servant be skilled, and do what she does quickly and easily; and do thus as it is worth moving for healing.
de plusors enfans	about several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the uterus one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more up to fifteen, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise physician, and it is necessary that the servant knows everything about this, because such things can happen; so do according to what is needed.
de l’enfant mort	about a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman with a dead child or a pregnancy that is not coming out, as I said in the section on divisions, and there is no movement, and you are forced to intervene manually; then you must know if the woman is of good health, and does not have any accident, or if she fears death. Then the woman should be propped up on her back, with her hips tilted down and her legs raised. The servant should hold her thighs with both hands, or tie her to the bed so that she does not slip during the removal of the child. Then rub the mouth of the uterus with moist oils containing musk, fenugreek seeds and linseed, and then the servant should anoint their hands with these oils and musks. Then gently insert them into the uterus, and where they are inserted, press once to make sure it is fitting for this purpose. Make sure that if the child descends feet first, you insert the hook into its legs or hips on both sides; and it is necessary that she holds the hook in her right hand, placing the curve between her left elbow, and inserts it gently with all her hand, inserting the hook into any of these places we have mentioned until the space is empty. And this is the shape of the hook:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then stick against the other side once, or twice if you have need of it, so that the extraction is even; and then stretch them evenly while moving from one side to the other, for easy removal, and let the hooks be tooth-like for holding tightly.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if some part remains, then the surgeon may take some of his fingers dipped in oil and put them into that part, and pull on the other part; and if none remain, then place this hook higher up and do so until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be pulled back due to tension, then you must wrap the cloth around it until all is out; then cut into the joint of the sole or at the side, and do similarly for the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is too tight at the outlet, or has a sharp-pointed bone assembled there, then you must place the spatula spinosum between your fingers, cut off the point, and extract the bone; or bore it with the instrument called "almidach", the shape of which comes with the tools in the chapter that follows this one. Do likewise if the child has a naturally large head; and then pull out the bones with forceps, and if the head does not emerge even with great effort, cut it open until the moisture from the pit outlet emerges; and if it cannot come out, then cut it off piece by piece as you are able; and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce through it until the moisture flows forth.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	"If the child is standing on its feet and the attraction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is easy,"
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is stuck in the belly or breast, you must pull it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and cut the belly or breast until the moisture that's there flows away; and if other members are removed but the head remains, then put your hand deep into the marrow, and draw it up to the mouth of the marrow; then put in one or two onions, and boil them well; and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come, do not work there, rather apply moist and greasy things; and use dressings, and such have been softened in warm water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If the child is lying on its side and you cannot set it right, then treat it as we have said for a living child; but if there is no power left, then draw it forth in pieces, leaving nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And once you have done this, if hot abscesses come in the marrow, then use the dressings we have mentioned; and if blood comes flowing, let it be put into strained water, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	"I saw a woman whose belly was bitten by one child, then another came out on top of it and killed the other."
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	"After some time, an abscess formed in her cheek and swelled until it opened, and then there was a great flow of pus."
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	"I was called to heal her, but I thought for a long time and could not hold the wound closed."
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	"I applied a plaster with strong attraction, and after some days one bone came out, and later another one did as well."
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	"I was very amazed because the belly has no bones."
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	"So I thought that they were the bones of a dead child."
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I opened the wound and removed many bones until the woman was much improved. The woman lived for a long time afterwards, but occasionally a little bit of bone would come out of its place; and I recorded this chapter only because when masters find something unusual, they should know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	"How to return the womb to its place"
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	"Next comes the figure of the press, with which books are printed; and at two turns around the two keys of the two lions."
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more slender than the restraint and made of ebony or boxwood. The mouth of the wood should be two fingers wide, and the edges of the wood one and a half palms long. And there should be two joints of the same wood in the middle, each closed on one end with half a palm's length or a little more; and these two joints are placed in the mouth of the mortise to open it when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more slender and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood wood, resembling a pair of pliers. It has two joints on each end, one palm long and two fingers wide. When you want to open the mortise with this tool, make the woman lie down on her back, legs apart, then insert the two ends of the tool into the mortise together, holding the head of the tool under her thighs. Then open your hand according to the size of the tool, as you would with pliers, opening the mouth of the mortise until it reaches the desired width.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	"These instruments are all mounted and have many similar forms. When the master has prepared them, the faster he works, the higher they are raised for men because of their size."
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	"Do not disdain any instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessity cannot be excused."
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	If labor is prolonged during childbirth, then you should instruct the woman to hold her breath and then have her sneeze with a cloth on her mouth and nose; if she faints from this, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this does not work, take a pot, make a hole in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as calamint, rue, anise, camomile, celery, and centory; cook these herbs or some of them in water over the fire. Then place one end of a tube in the pot and the other end in the woman's mouth, holding it until the vapors enter her. Then have her sneeze as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	"If the afterbirth comes out quickly."
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If she remains in this condition afterward and is not delivered yet, command the midwife to wet her left hand in sesame oil or musk from althea and then insert it into the woman's genital area. When she finds the secondine, grasp it gently and pull it straight down little by little so that the woman does not fall during extraction; but rather move it gently to the right and left, and then cut it. It will come out and separate.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the womb is narrow and tightened, we have spoken about sneezing remedies and herb fumigation. But if it does not yield from any of these, then ensure that you do not err in milking; rather, what is at the mouth of the womb should be tied to the woman's thigh, then perform a sitz bath with tetrapharmacon oil. She will then pass it and recover, and she will have heat. But nonetheless, when she passes, there may come a foul odor in her stomach and head, causing her distress.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	"Therefore it is necessary to perform fumigations appropriate for this [condition]; some of the ancients have tried fumigation with mustard and dried figs."
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	"The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers [menstrual flow] and the afterbirth is this:"
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it resembles true sulfur in appearance. Place the refined head over the fire with wide mouths, and perform fumigation on the coals until the pitch is wasted, then begin again.
de percier lou fondement	"to pierce the anus"
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without their anus being pierced, instead it is obstructed by a thin membrane. Therefore, the midwife must pierce this membrane with her thumb, taking care not to use a sharp awl, and guard against touching the wound. Then apply warm cloths soaked in wine and oil until healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	"And if you doubt that [the anus] will not open up again, then place a small tube made of lead into the perforation and leave it there for several days, removing it when the child is ready to go to bed."
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	"And sometimes this obstruction comes from a sudden wound or abscess; it is necessary to cover this sudden [wound]: if it is cured, then treat it as we have said for the lead tube."
de la fistule dou fondement	"of a fistula of the anus"
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that arise beneath the fundament are nodular, and growths that occur near the fundament defluxion, or in the space of the two buttocks, so there is one fistula or more; and when this nodule is ancient, it works, and increases moist, white or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas persist; and they are known by those who have a discharge or windy noise when the patient has an evacuation, and sometimes some worms come out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	"And there are fistulas which penetrate as far as the bladder and as far as halfway along the penis; and they reach as far as the hip joint and as far as the thigh."
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the persistent fistula under the fundament, and not persistent; and it is that you place your two index fingers on the fundament, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no torsion.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is torsion, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no discharge or windy noise or worm comes out through the hole as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	"And when the fistula is persistent as far as the bladder or as far as the passage of urine, then urine comes out and it cannot be healed by medications."
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it pierces as far as the joint of the thigh, then the coming tent is until there; if there is no tortuosity and the invention of pain around it, then it is that it leaves quickly, and medicine or ointment is useless; and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure except labor, and vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	For that which is not Persian and is not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced. And it should be that the patient lies on their back in your hands; raise the legs until they reach the thighs, incline them toward the belly; then insert a tent of brass or lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you must insert your two index fingers there, if you then sense that the tent has pierced; and if you feel between your fingers either the syphon or flesh, then know that it is Persian; do not work on it unless it can be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Some say it is possible to heal certain wounds, but this rarely happens. And the aid given there involves heating a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before; and place it hot into the fistula until it reaches the base; do this twice or three times until you know that the broken veins are burnt, which resemble an feathers quill; then dress with warm ointment until that vein breaks free, then apply a bandage with healing ointment between skin and wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If healed this way, it's good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If not healed this way, it cannot be otherwise. And if the bandage enters but does not reach the base of the hand that is at the base, and there is a thick covering of skin or fat between your two fingers, and you see the fistula where the covering of the heart comes out; then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push the bandage ahead, and afterwards apply the cautery until it reaches the head of the bandage; and the bandage will be delivered, and fall away; then burn those broken veins that resemble a feathers quill, and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	"And if the skin is thin and cuts between you and your work, then cauterize it with fire or strong medication."
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the cautery of fire brings together two things: namely, the burning of these adjacent parts, and the staunching of blood and the drying up of moisture. Then treat moist wounds with butter or crushed plants until the place becomes soft, and let the burned flesh come out in this softness. Then dress the wound with bandages compressing hard flesh, and these medicines should be dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	"For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not return again."
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	"And if a fistula comes from deep within the anus and is far from the body, insert your two fingers into the anus and search for it."
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the wound, and between two skins or between skin and flesh where it is about to burst, there should be no force except through trust and hope, by administering one of these three methods: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it until it reaches bottom, or if you can't do this, put tents on it and treat it as before; but don't go too deep lest you cut the tissue that holds the fundament, and let evacuation come forth without wanting to. Then dress it as we have said; perhaps it will be cured, or you may remove that covering and cleanse it after it has been cut near the fundament, either with a tent or some other pointed instrument. Then wash the torn flesh that is in the wound as much as you can, then strive to restore the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament: this will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is located on the side towards the base near the skin above, then take a pierced tent at the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I twist one thread into two, and insert the tube along with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the top
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it pierces into the margin of the base inside, then pull out the thread from that pierced tent, so that you insert your two fingers into the base; and pull the head of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and bind them tightly to each other, and leave them for one or two days; and tighten it sometimes until the threads cut through these skins that are between them and fall off; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open on its own, then make an opening for it in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to break open a fistula that is too deep, and then heal it as we have said until it is clean
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spine spatula used to open a fistula is very sharp at one end and cutting, but not sharp on the other end so that it does not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: those that are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and there is always blood issuing from them, and there may be one or more of them, and they defy the fundament and the head of the fundament; but those that defy so have a little moisture, and there is sometimes a little yellow water or some blood, and they have the color of flesh; and the treatment for those who have hemorrhoids inside the fundament, is that you instruct the patient to strain for going to the privy until the fundament pushes them out, and then grasp the threads with tweezers, or hold them with your nail, then cut them at their roots; and if the nails cannot hold them due to moisture, then grasp them with a thread, or cotton, or a piece of chamlet; and pull them out with two fingers, then cut them, and powder over some warm powders that are in place of cautery; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed; and if the fundament cannot push them out, then administer to the patient a biting and sharp clyster for washing what is inside the fundament so that it can come out openly; when the patient strains, and if the threads are outside the fundament, then treatment is easy; and it is that you grasp them with your nail or tweezers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said until they are healed, and that there may be no incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you stitch according to this manner: take one thread of wool and put it into a needle, then pull the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from the other side, then turn both ends of the thread underneath the needle, and let it be loose; and draw the thread tightly, then tie the knot, and remove the needle, and do so for all the others, and leave one to correct the superfluity of blood. Then place on the foundation a piece of cloth moistened in rose oil or cerote, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient that they rest; and then let them lie until they have fallen asleep, and when they have fallen asleep, then heal them with ointment and other remedies until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Regarding the drying of phlegm in the foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a drying of phlegm in the intestines, either due to constriction of nature or when the disease is old and medicines are ineffective
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must scrape off with the point of a spatula or your nail the scab that has formed on top, so that it does not become moistened. Then heal it until it is solid as it should be; and if it cannot heal, then start scraping again more forcefully than before until it is completely healed and the scab is removed. Then heal it until it is completely healed.
dou fremit	trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are small creatures that appear before the body, and they move very deeply; sometimes they feel cold, and one feels them like a shiver of death, which comes to all parts of the body, but more so in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is: take a quill of an eagle's feather or a strong vulture's feather and place it upon the shivering sensation such that the circle surrounds the shivering entirely; then twist your hand around the entire feather until you grasp the shivering from its root and push it deeply in, grasping it from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	"And if you see, do this with a reed or iron rod in accordance with this form, and let it be thin below and tapering above:"
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	"Do not pierce it, so that you can hold the two [joints] together and press them tightly. And if you see fit, cauterize the trembling as is described in the chapter on cautery."
de la forme dou clistere	"of the form of the clyster"
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	"Sometimes a silver or steel clyster is made, sometimes one of molten brass or iron; and sometimes they are made of these small or large instruments, according to their size."
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	"Those that are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small."
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	"The form of the small and large clyster is as follows: wide where the belly is tied in this manner:"
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a blockage or the belly is tied up as you see it, and the head is pierced inside; and there are two holes on one side and one hole on the other; and the belly where medicine is placed in a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes, and there is one space between each hole, then insert strong thread of coarse yarn twisted into an X or wound around, and bind the belly like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it at the instrument beforehand with a strong thread, then administer the enema; this is the form of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medication not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the head of the enema with oil or almond nut cream or similar substance, then insert it gently; then the minister squeezes with both hands until it is all squeezed out, then remove the enema, and the patient lifts their legs to the side, and if the medication wants to come out, let it come out as much as possible; and if it stays in for a whole night, it will be of greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you perform a clyster in the case of diarrhea of the belly, and the medicine rushes out quickly, then recommence it until it is retained."
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscess, then let the enema be as thin as for a child; and this is the shape of the thin enema upon which the skin should be restrained:
des plaies	"wounds"
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	"We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines according to their completion."
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made."
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by cutting of stone, and cutting with sword and knife, or lance or club or dart, or similar things; and they are made according to the places on the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or thigh, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with simple head wounds, for the reminder will come in its own chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, you should take care if it's from a blow with a stone or similar things, and if the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the raising of a hot boil: immediately cleanse it with cold water especially if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the cleansing be opposite to the wounded part; and have the patient abstain from wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it will not cleanse itself, then thin down his diet and do not let him drink wine or eat meat; and place on the wound, if hot boils come, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine. And if there is no hot boil, then place on the fresh wound with all its blood, without moving it through the air, powder which I will mention a bit later; and if the wound has moved, then place some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	"And if the wound is large, like a sword cut or similar ones, and its lips cannot be brought together by tying, then bring them together with stitches, as I will tell you about in the treatment of abdominal wounds, regarding stitching."
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone and inflamed, and barely adheres to just a bit, scrape it; then dress the wound with medicine, and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also like poultry and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find putrefaction in the skin, and it does not reach the bone, scrape off all the corruption, and apply fire, then dress it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be staunched by medicines alone, tie up the artery; and if you find it dislocated, bind it with a thread; and if this does not help at all, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	"And if these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is easy; and this is what you should do: put in this powder that seals before the air moves it."
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The manner of making the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, grind it finely, and apply it to the wound, and bind it tightly until it adheres well and joins with all its blood; then tie it firmly, but do not remove the medicine until the wound is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	"Sometimes they do this with quicklime alone, when they do not have incense or dragon's blood, but the air has not moved the wound."
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the burn has moved the wound, especially in summer, then do not put this powder on it; but apply some digested ointments or poultices made of barley flour and water and honey, until it yields; then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if bone fragments come with the wound and it is small, extract them with fine forceps; and I will tell you later about head fractures.
de la plaie dou col	"Regarding wounds on the neck:"
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	"If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, except that if the nerve of the neck or an artery is cut."
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave them alone and not apply anything restrictive, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, like warm water washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cucumber washed likewise in sweet water, and other moist compresses in this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, it should be stitched and bound with bandages until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and have gathered blood and are full of pus, pierce them lower down; and if an artery is cut and there is a flowing of blood, open it up and ligate it and cauterize it if necessary. And if the spine of the neck or the heart is cut, and the conduct is guarded by which the flesh goes, then bind the heart to the windpipe of the neck, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then bind it properly, and leave it for some days, then cure it with healing ointments until it is healed. And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, scrape it out; and if there are fragments of bone, draw them out all if you can, and those which you cannot have, leave them until the wound rots, and cleanse and dress the wound properly. And if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there are bones and fistulas in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Chapter on wounds made by a spear or dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a lance or knife and the wound is deep, observe whether air enters the wound when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal. And if it is not deep but is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder at the first hour nor bind it tightly so that no blood flows back downwards to reach the heart and kill the patient; instead, apply attractive ointment and tie it twice a day. And if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three days or four, or more; so that there will be no spasm nor harmful trembling of the heart. And when you see favorable conditions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Then heal it with dressings and other treatments until it is healed. And if it cannot heal nor close, know then that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or worse on the front or back, so its cure is in front; if it's large, stitch it; if it's small, use powder. If it's close to the bone and has chopped pieces, search for the wound, and remove foreign bodies if they're infected; if not infected, let the wound rot until it discharges; other wounds on other limbs are judged similarly as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	on bursting of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the belly is large and medium and small; from a large wound sometimes the intestine or the nerve of the intestines comes out, causing intrusion into it; stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a smaller wound is worse than a larger one, because if one puts the intestines back in piece by piece, they are not put back in place properly. For this reason, a moderate wound is better, because it allows the intestine to be reset in its proper place rather than being moved around like others. Know that there are four ways to suture the belly: two common stitches occur in abdominal suturing, and two other stitches are common for other wounds on the body; however, these stitches are more specific for abdominal suturing, and I will explain each one clearly.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestine has been torn, it is not a difficult thing to reset, this can be done in one of two ways: either because the wound is small, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or one clean cloth in hot water alone, or boil in water with cumin and cyperus and spikenard, and apply the intestine until the swelling has gone; and sometimes use this restricting wine, and drink honey for relief.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling diminishing, moisten the intestine with water or decoction of mallows, for by this the entrance is enlarged somewhat; and if it cannot enter, then slightly open the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is that which involves cutting, which no one should perform without great necessity; and this is the tool for breaking: cut within the curve and do not cut deep; here is the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude, then replace them according to their natural form in their proper place if you have the ability, for this is valuable.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large and it is below the belly, make the patient lie on their back, with legs higher than their head. If it's under the belly, raise the head and chest more than the lower parts; similarly, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, arrange so that the wounded part is higher than the other; thus must it be arranged for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	In small wounds, first prepare what you're equipped with, then have between your hands one pitiful servant who will wipe away all the discharge with their hand and bring together the lips. This is the common way of suturing: take one or several needles depending on the size of the wound, then leave two fingers' breadth at the head of the wound, and insert a needle with good strong thread; pierce both sides of the skin with both sides of the sinew beneath it until you pierce through that part, then bring together both heads of the sinew in four places; then tie them together with doubled thread around the needle on both sides, then bring together both sides of the wound neatly, and leave two fingers' breadth at the head of the wound, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and continue doing this according to how many needles you need until all the wound is closed. The needles should be medium-sized, between thin and thick, for too-thin needles cut all the flesh, and too-thick ones cannot enter well: therefore they must be medium-sized; also do not insert the needles too deeply into the flesh and skin lest they cut open the wound before it's stitched up; then cut off the heads of the needles so they don't harm the patient when sleeping, and put tents or bandages on the needleheads to keep them in place, leaving them until the wound is healed. This method of stitching with needles is more useful for small wounds, as one or two needles suffice there. The second method of stitching is common: bring together both sides of the skin and both sides of the sinew together with a needle with good medium thread; when you've pierced all four places together, then pull the needle back to where you started in the manner one sews cloth, placing the thickness of a finger's width between each stitch. This stitching is used by men, and I stitched up a wound that one man had in his belly which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's width long, and two palms' worth of intestines were protruding, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I reset his intestines after it had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound healed in 15 days. I treated it, and it was free from infection.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the physician had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle. I did not treat it with any ointment, as I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. Instead, I placed old cotton on the wound twice daily and washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	I will tell you the two proper ways to stitch: take the needle and insert it from outside until it pierces inside. Once it has pierced through evenly, place the thread on the needle or tie it where you inserted the needle, then pierce it again from inside out. The technique of this stitch is like how furriers sew furs, leaving the thread once on one side and picking it up again on the other until the entire stitch is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, which Galen describes accurately, is as follows: some people assemble the two parts naturally and apply one end of the thread to the other end in this manner: insert a needle near one edge of the wound, pierce only that spot, leaving both ends of the thread; then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside until it reaches the inside at both ends of the thread; then pierce both through the outer layer to the inner layer at two other points on the opposite side of the wound. This is the correct method of suturing and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word, and some testify that when sewing the belly, one should use two needles with thread in each. One needle should be placed on one side and the other on the other, like those who sew hides. Know that when a rupture is inside the belly, the stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the ars has moved it, then replace the intestine and the skin; then put powder of wormwood on it, and if the ars has moved, put some ointment that is present until the wound bows; and close the stitches, and let them be sewed the sifac and the mirach; then treat the wound as others until it is healthy; and if you do not have medicines, put on it immediately when it begins to swell, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	But in many dispositions where wounds are simple, you have no need for other medicine; and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the principal members, then it is necessary to moisten light linen in warm tempered oil or rose oil, and put it around the joints and under the armpits; and if there is pain or corruption in the bowels, which happens often, then cleanse it with black wine tincture, especially if corruption reaches the intestines; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines called "jejunum" cannot heal when injured due to the thinness of its veins and the delicacy of the entire body, as well as its closeness in nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the intestine jumps out of the wound, push it back in like the intestines while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned green or black, tie off the area that is black to prevent blood flow, as there are veins and arteries present. Then cut what is between the ties, and hold the two ends hanging from the bottom part of the wound until the intestine falls back into place, allowing for easier extraction; then close the wound.
de la routure dou boueil	of the wound's opening
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	If the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some people, as I saw one man who was pierced in the stomach by a lance; his wound was on the right side of the stomach, became inflamed, and turned into a fistula. The digestive contents and wind leaked out, but I treated it according to my ability, without ceasing until he was healed, with the site well joined together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him bound, I doubted that the patient had ill in his belly; but there was no harm, and he remained in better condition, eating and drinking. And some surgeons said that if there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: take large thorns, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thorn has opened its mouth, place it on both lips so that it draws its mouth shut; then cut off the head, and this holds so that it cannot untie, then put another thorn afterward in the same manner as before until the wound is completely closed.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the head is in the intestine and there is no harm to the patient, then one can tie the intestine with a thin thread of gut taken from an animal's intestine, like this: take the head of this gut that is very skinned, and then tie at the head of this gut a thin twisted linen thread, then insert the thread into the needle and cut the intestine, and draw it back together; and this manner of suturing with a thread is not futile but according to the path of trust and hope. And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the larger intestines, there is no remedy nor health except for skillfulness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know this: any wound or abscess that grows old is universally called a "fistula", and the same goes for one that is hollowed out and caves in.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is truly a broken and white nodule, where no pain is felt, and it is also hollow like the feathers of a bird; sometimes it opens clear and wide, sometimes thick; sometimes small, sometimes large. I have spoken about this in the section on wounds: any wound that does not heal has flesh because of one of these eight causes: either due to the thinness or evilness of blood or body; or because there is hard flesh inside and on its lips that prevents flesh from growing; or because it is too hollowed out; or because the area is obstructed, and the material is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for treatment was not good; or because corruption is in a pestilential manner; or because digestion is tardy by nature in that region and healing is delayed, or because there are veins or bones present. I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and their treatments using medicines in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	But now I must tell you about the treatment of fistula that is performed by manual labor.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries, nerves, or the face, intestines, bladder, ribs, spine, or any joint of the hands or feet; and also those that affect the principal property of the member.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but effort and ignorance. And if there is a fistula that does not extend to the location I mentioned, and you trust in its cure and recognize it, then take a tent of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, use it to search for it; and if the fistula is crooked, search with a subtle tent made of lead, for lead bends around the twistiness. And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search well by tents, then rinse it with a clyster through one of the openings, for moisture runs from one opening to another and cleanses it. Then cut towards your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve inside, and how deep it goes, and ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when you press on their hand, and where they feel it. And once you truly know where it is, whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places I mentioned earlier, then cut according to what I have told you, remove the fracture and rotten flesh inside, and then cure it until it is healed. And if the fistula is very deep in the right place, then cut as deeply as you can, then insert moist tents into hot medicine water, and put them up to the head of the fistula until the medicine eats away at the excess that remains at the bottom. Then apply warming ointments made from healthy flesh until it is healed. And if it is not healed by this method, cauterize it as we have said. And if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerve does not trouble the main member as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then cleanse it until all corruption is removed, then treat the surrounding flesh until it is clean; and if it is not clean, and returns to its former state, know that you have not yet reached the bottom: uncover and search until you reach the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore it to its place; and if it is thus clean, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, so you cannot reach it: there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature. And if there are some small corrupted bones and you can grasp them with forceps, then remove them with the appropriate instrument; and if there are many bones, remove them all, leaving none behind. And if moisture hinders you, without error or fear, cut away moisture and flesh, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then put on the wound something irritating to cause corruption, and leave it until the spot is corrupted all around the bones, and then they will come out more easily; and if it's a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, then continue causing corruption until all the blackness is gone, then restore the wound; and if there is much corruption which comes near to the marrow of the bone; it must be cut down to the corruption, and then treated until it is sound. And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid from this in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was once a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to some cause that came from within the body, so much so that matter gathered in the leg and it swelled with a large abscess. There was no apparent reason to open it; but foolish doctors operated on it until the abscess opened, and they removed many matters from it, and it became a fistula, and there were many holes through which they poured boiling water and body moisture onto his flesh. Many doctors tried to treat him for about two years, and none of them had any skill in this art, so I was called upon, and when I saw the young man's leg and the medicines used to treat it, and what flowed out of the holes in great quantities, I saw that the young man's flesh became red and had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these openings, then sought all the openings, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hurried and cut into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, which was corrupted and pierced, with corruption reaching to the bone within; I scraped off what appeared of the corrupted bone, believing there would be no other corruption but that which I removed; and began treating the wound with healing medicines over a long time, yet it did not heal. And then I resumed, discovering the bone as before, finding the corruption continued in the bone, which I scraped off and removed, intending to heal the area. But I could not do so until I cut around about a palm's width of the bone, and pulled it out entirely, then restored it with medicines; it was soon healed and sound, but still needed further work due to the patient's weakness, which he could not endure, and his fear of death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was entirely healed, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, and his condition was good with no harm or opposition at all, neither coming nor going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated like this: Take linen, and stretch it at the head of the exposed bone, and command that it be held up high; and take another thicker lien of linen than the first, and tie it over the flesh which is on top of the bone, and hold the head so that you can pull away the rotting flesh below, and uncover the flesh above where you wish to see, so that the bone does not wound the flesh; and put a brand or hot stone under the bone to move away the rotting flesh; and this should be done until one can see and feel the corruption, and still again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is decayed and does not appear, and the decay is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh. Then place a brand beneath, and then use a chisel to span the decay from one part to another, with the chisel's length equal to that of the decay as we have said; and if the decay is at the joint, cut away the decayed joint and chisel the bone that contains it from the other side; and if the decay is in the continuity of two joints, there is no other option but to cut; and if the decay is in the hand's wrist or foot's ankle, that is very serious indeed, but nonetheless you must inquire about this decay how it appears; and cleanse it in all possible ways without harming veins or nerves; and know that many tools are needed for cutting these bones, according to their arrangement, appearance from above, thickness and fineness, size and smallness, hardness; and therefore one must prepare his instruments suitable for each kind of operation; and know that the work will show you the instrument you need according to your knowledge in this art and testimony of disease manners; so consider carefully the instrument you need according to what is necessary.
dou feu	Fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head putrefies either due to internal causes or due to lack; and when you have treated this corruption with medicines but they do not help, then you must cover that limb up to the place where the corruption starts, so that the patient may escape from death through this, or from the greater evil of loss of limb; and the sign is that the limb becomes black as if it has been burned by fire, and afterwards, the corruption spreads limb by limb, affecting the whole body. So act quickly, and if it is due to the sting of venomous beasts such as sea scorptions or snakes and similar creatures, cover the head of the two fingers, but do not let it spread up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches the hand, cover at the joint so that corruption does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, cover at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, death is certain, and no external remedies however powerful can help. And do likewise when corruption comes to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cover after the other joint; and if it reaches the foot, cover all the foot; and if it rises up the leg, cover at the knee joint. And if it goes above the knee, there is no other remedy than letting the patient die. The manner of covering or binding the limb is as follows: tie it above and below with cloths, and extend some servants one on each side of the lower tie, and others on each side of the upper tie, and cut away the flesh that is between the two ties with a broad knife until the bone is bare. Then cover with wool or oilcloth, and place linen cloths on either side so that the covering does not touch the healthy part, and bring no other injury or abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the spot immediately, or apply some constraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it heals. And I will tell you what happened to a man in great peril: his leg became blackened as if burnt by fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his knee joint, spreading throughout the entire leg. When the man saw the corruption, he quickly cut off his leg and recovered; but many years later, the corruption reappeared at his hand's knuckle, and he came to me. I applied repulsive substances after cleaning his body, but the corruptions could not stop. He then wished that I amputate his hand, but I did not want to, as I hoped to repel the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he might die, for his strength was weak. So he completely despaired and returned to his land, quickly cutting off his hand himself and recovering. And I tell this story only so that others may know what to do in such a case.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No comment.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	A boil sometimes appears in a fleshy spot and remains for such a long time that it forms a large gathering of skin; then it becomes round and pierces, and the skin jumps away, leaving the spot empty like a vessel. The skin above it is as thin as gauze, and it does not penetrate to the bone or nerve. Such an illness is called 'boil' and not 'fistula'; but if it extends so deeply that it reaches the bone inside, then it is called 'fistula'. And its cure is thus: if you have confidence that the skin will become corrupted and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then perform a clyster thus...
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the bowel is deep, so let not flesh enter there; and if you cannot cover the chest below as you wish, arrange it in such a manner that the bowel moves to the lowest place where it is, for when the bowel is deep, so let not flesh enter there, and if you cannot cover the chest below as you wish, arrange it in this way: that the bowel moves easily downward, and leave nothing of the bowel; and take medicines consolidative to put on the skin, and stretch over the linen cloth that covers all the skin; then cut forcefully towards the opening of the chest a little wider than the first, since stretching soft ointment on the other cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and place it on the opening of the skin to alleviate the bowel, and do not remove the outer large cloth until after many days once; and that which is on the opening of the chest, often remove it to remove the bowel, and know what comes from the bowel, if it's venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been thus extended and you see the nature that jumps on the opening of the skin, know that the chest is already healed, and approaches health; and then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast becomes painful and swollen after many days, know that the breast is not healed yet.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	Furthermore, if subtle poisons remain after a long time, do not despair of health, for recovery approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If there are people whose wounds take a long time to heal or those that do well from the opposite treatment; and if undigested food jumps from the stomach after many days without the stomach hurting; and if the stomach takes a long time to digest and is distant, apply drying medicines in substance and virtue like diachylon ointment, for there is much vitriol in it, which is the last medicine. Take diachylon ointment made with rose oil and red vinegar of equal substance; then cook and use it. The same can be done with cooked honey when diachylon ointment is not available, or take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them, make a powder, put it on the honey while it's on the fire, and then apply it to the cloth and press it onto the stomach. Sometimes aristolochia longa and celery root are administered, which is also like farina of cyperus and centory; use simples or compounds: grind them, make a powder, put it on the honey mentioned before, and use it. If the cure takes a long time and isn't cured by this treatment, know that the corruption has gone deep and has impressed upon the bone, the hard members, or the ligaments; then apply the cure for fistulas as we have said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the aposteme of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Pustule is a boil that arises beneath the nail of the little finger of the hand, or of the foot, or sometimes arises in other toes; and when it becomes elderly, and no attention is paid to it, then comes a thick boil, and runs and eats away so much that it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes eats it all away; and the corruption goes as far as the bone, until there comes stinking pain, and the head of the toe is swollen, and the color is yellow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If the treatment does not help as we have said in the section on it, then you must cut away with iron all the excess that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is very helpful if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy. But if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to hurt, and causes a sore, then you must put under the nail that hurts the flesh, and lift it up, and cut away that subtle and thin flesh lightly, and put burning medicines on the remaining flesh to remove all of it; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it off and cauterize with fire, for as long as the corrupted bone remains there, it cannot heal; and if you see both being corrupted, cut off one first just like it was mentioned earlier, then treat until it heals; and if it's infected and inflamed causing great pain, you must heal it first; then cut the corner of the hip bone diagonally from above, making sure the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; if this happens, put something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain in the wrist
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Some men are sometimes born with both feet joined together, sometimes they have bones between them, and sometimes there is a nail; sometimes they are born at the root of the joint, where their birth is in some toes.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those born with a web between their toes do not move it, and those born at the joint of the foot sometimes can move it; the cut for those who are fleshy should be made in this way: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; so be careful with him.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one born with or having a deviated anus, it is necessary that you first cut the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable saw, then cleanse it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that occur at both hips come either by birth or from a wound, or from burns, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Then you must cut that adhesion so that the parts revert to their natural shapes; then place between two wet cloths or rags soaked in rose oil, so they do not adhere again; or place between two pieces of fine lead until the site is healed as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	"If one's elbow comes apart with the palm of his hand, then cut that bone just like so."
des vils	Of the wicked
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Warts are large veins entwined and filled with melancholic excesses that come from many parts of the body; and they occur more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him a purge for the stomach and then the holy oil from the church.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cautery of iron is done in two ways: one is to cut them and draw out the black blood; the other way is to lift the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is done in this manner: First, raise the leg of hot water very strongly until the thick blood is subtilized. Then, press the leg of the patient from above the hip down to the part below the knee joint; then cut the vein at point I, or II, or III with a wide blade, then lift and pull out black blood by hand from one end to the other, as much as the strength of the patient can bear. Then, let it rest and instruct them to apply black cole plaster around their wound. And repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, which harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The raising of the veins is done in this manner: Raise the leg of the patient, especially if it has much hair. Then place it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell up. If you do not have a bath, heat it by fire first. Cut at the vein towards the long part of the knee's head, or below the ankle joint. Then cover the skin with an ointment, and scrape off the vein from each side until it appears upon touching. It will appear red and black, resembling a white thread when entering the skin. Insert a skewer underneath until it lifts up the vein. Then raise it with another skewer gently, as you did before. Cut again in another place above or below the third joint. Scrape off the skin over the vein until it appears. Then lift it using the skewer, as done previously. Make another cut if necessary, then pull and lift it until it comes out entirely. If you cannot pull it out, insert a needle with strong doubled thread, tie and pull it out. Insert it underneath the skewer, turning your hand from side to side until it all comes out. Ensure it does not break, for if it breaks, it cannot be pulled or lifted out, causing harm to the patient. Once completely treated, place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound's location, and keep it clean until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not chop it; and draw it out as we have mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and it does not cut evenly, so that it does not cut into the vein; and it should be thickly curved, for if it were thin, it would cut into the vein, but let it be thick as we have said.
de la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein runs into the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and on land where there is no moisture; and sometimes it appears elsewhere besides the legs, which happens due to rot that comes beneath the skin, like how a serpent and worms enter between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a very great inflammation comes upon the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to protrude forth like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the thigh opens, you must wrap around it a piece of lead from one and a half to two feet in length, and knot it, allowing the lead to hang on the leg; each time it leaks, wrap around the lead again, and knot it. If it is too long, cut off a part, wrap the remaining portion, but do not cut it at its root lest it returns into the flesh, causing an abscess and decay in that place, and causing bad illness. For this reason, it must be treated bit by bit until it reaches the top, leaving nothing on the body; sometimes this vein is as long as five or ten palms, and once a man came to me whose was ten palms long. When you cut it, insert one dart into the opening, pierce it to the bottom so that all of it comes out; empty the matter inside, then bring healing medicines to the place to prevent decay for some days, then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein is moistened, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and much blood flows from it, causing it to swell; treat it therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land 'cattle disease', because it often occurs in oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, ascending and descending, and can be felt as it moves from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it causes swelling; and it is feared because when it travels through the body, it may reach the head, enter the eye by chance, and destroy the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and drawn out, one can only remove it while it is moving; therefore, tie the area above and below with a strong, tight bandage, then make an incision and draw it out until the worm dies if it is deeply embedded in the flesh. The greatest harm it causes is when it runs towards the eye, as we have said; and if you see it approaching the head near the eye, press down firmly on the eyebrow below it, then make an incision and draw it out. The patient should use bodily purification with medicinal solutions to dissolve corrupt humors, and avoid eating foods that cause corruption.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land 'vakkiri,' and it is a pain that comes into certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and soon afterwards, I saw it move like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, as if it were quicksilver moving from one place to another; the pain departed from that spot, and fixed itself in the shoulder, and then a little while later it spread throughout her body, so much so that it reached the other arm; then she told me that it kept turning around her body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	"I wondered greatly how it could move thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness behave in this manner."
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I had heard many times that pain could indeed move from one place to another, but I had never seen it happen as clearly as in this woman's case; and I thought that this was because the woman had a thin body and visible veins, making the movement of the windiness more apparent. This does not apply to those who are obese, however, with moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain which we have mentioned, then quickly place a hot poultice above and below it, and then cut until that constrained wind escapes its place; cauterize the area; and if you cannot see it with your eyes, cure it with those things that expel winds, such as fetid pills and pills of saffron, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	"Hemorrhoids are various in appearance and according to the parts of the body where they are found."
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	There are various kinds of them, some having large points and others small, some being barbed and others smooth; some have two angles, others have tongues, and some have pieces. And those that fall into any limb do so in two ways: either they strike the principal member itself, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar members
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls into any place in these members and the signs of death which I will tell you about afterwards appear to you: then you must be careful with the extraction of this arrow because many deaths come afterwards; but if this bad sign does not appear to you and the arrow is not deeply embedded, pull it out and dress the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the arrow striking the brain when it falls and pierces the bone, and leaps forth the sinew that is on top of the brain, is when there is darkness and suddenness and exertion and redness within the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is without fever from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and from the wound flows moist white matter like feathers, and also burns of flesh; and if these signs appear to you, then take care of the treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	And the sign of the arrow striking the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and perhaps the arrow moves like a bird's feather, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat come forth, and fainting: know then without doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	"The signs of a hemorrhoid that affects the lungs include foaming without pain coming out of the wound, swelling of the throat, change in color of the patient, loud sighing, and seeking cold air."
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	"If a hemorrhoid appears on the chest covering near the ribs, there is much wheezing and pain and sighing, and all the shoulders move."
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	"And if a hemorrhoid appears in the stomach, digested food may sometimes come out of the wound."
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	"And if a hemorrhoid appears in the abdomen and dark feces come out of the intestines, then there is no hope of recovery or extraction of the hemorrhoid."
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	"And if a hemorrhoid appears in the bladder and urine flows out with feces and the patient feels strong pain, know that the wound is fatal."
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	"Other parts such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, backbones, thighs, buttocks, legs and similar parts are safe from hemorrhoids in many cases."
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	"When a hemorrhoid appears on a nerve or artery that is not venomous, as happened to me once so that you may do the same if necessary."
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one that an arrow fell on his ear near the root of the nose. I tried it and drew it out from beneath the ear's fat without causing pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And pulled out an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye beneath the eyebrow. The arrow was barbed and could not be reached except for its tip towards the face. It was a large arrow like a Turkish bow, with all its iron light without ears. The eye was healed and no bad accidents occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And pulled an Arab arrow with ears from the throat of a Christian. I cut the barbs and carefully extracted it until it was removed, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And pulled an arrow from a man's belly where it had fallen, and thought he would die. But after thirty days his condition did not change; I cut into the arrow, engaged it, and pulled it out forcefully without causing any bad accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to heal a man who has had an arrow fall upon his back, and the wound became hard; and the arrow remained inside him, without changing its natural position nor causing harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish to heal another man who had an arrow fall upon his face, and the wound became hard; and thus remained without causing great pain.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And an arrow was shot at the king's prince, who had it fall into his neck, inclining somewhat to the right side; and the arrow was entirely buried when I was called for healing three days after it fell.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	With all care, I tried to find it and did not feel it; but he felt pain and discomfort under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought that it was from the tip of the arrow. I put on the place a plaster of atracentum and digestive herbs so that the area would not swell up; and the point of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I placed the plaster on that day, and reopened the wound again, and the patient remained like this for a long time until he felt the arrowhead one day within his flesh; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened, and I tested it, feeling the tip of the arrowhead where it was stuck; then I continued applying the medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow became visible. It had been four months since the injury, and then the wound gaped so much that I could insert pliers into it, but I couldn’t pull out the arrowhead by moving it from side to side. So I didn’t give up and kept trying with various instruments until one day I was able to grasp it securely with well-made pliers, as described at the end of this chapter, and extract it, leaving the wound healed.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; I then repaired it, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient became entirely healthy.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you the method of extracting certain arrows, so that you may base your treatment on what I have not mentioned, for books cannot cover everything; but wise masters compare even small things, and find new works and tools based on what is present or lacking in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows leave the limbs into which they are struck in two ways: either through the opening through which they entered or through another part; and those that exit through where they entered are called 'entering arrows,' and sometimes they exit suddenly.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out suddenly, leave it alone until the flesh around it is ripe and the exit is opened; likewise if it has struck bone and cannot come out, leave it alone for some days and move it gently each day; then it will come out. And if it does not come out, carefully cut all around it with a fine knife until the surrounding area is widened, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes as far as one of the brain's ventricles, and some of the symptoms that I have mentioned appear to the patient: then do not pull it out, but leave it there for a few days until it becomes even, because if the arrow reaches so deep, it is fatal.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not reach deep enough to be fatal, and the patient remains for some days without bad symptoms, then prepare to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if it is very deeply stuck and cannot come out otherwise, then you should administer compresses around it, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healthy."
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in place inside the body so that it cannot be seen, then search for it thoroughly; and if you can feel it, pull it out with a suitable instrument. And if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins involved, then make the wound larger until it is big enough. Then pull out the arrow if you can, but if it has barbs on which it holds, cut away the flesh that is stuck around it, two parts on each side that you can manage, and then break off or bend back the barbs of the arrow so that you can pull it out; be careful not to break the arrow while pulling it out, as this would cause greater injury.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	"And if you cannot pull it out all at once, leave it until the wound around it is clean, then pull it out, for extraction will be easier."
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood opposes you, then follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter; and beware of incising the nerve and vein, and find out how you can carefully pull out the arrow without risk, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the position they were in when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help there can be, and if you cannot do so, then place them according to what signs indicate to you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	An arrow that comes from elsewhere, where some part of it is visible or the skin is swollen there: cut accordingly until forceps can grasp it, and then extract it: now it is removed.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	"And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand around it until it enters the bone, then widen the bone and pull it out."
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be extracted, leave it for now and then resume extraction until it comes out completely; and if the shaft of the arrow remains there, remove it along with the shaft. And if the shaft falls off and you see that pushing is necessary, then administer the hooking tool so that the tip of the arrow enters into the hook of the tool; and then push it out, and if the arrow has hooked itself, then insert the tool's point inward to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow has touched a bone, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls into the leg or belly or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cut upon it, then cut it open; and guard yourself from cutting the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch up the wound if necessary; and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	"The shape of forceps used to treat blades is like the beak of a bird, as shown here:"
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	"And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the blade."
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like the feather of a bird for driving into the tip of the arrow.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	"The shape of forceps for striking and holding is as follows:"
des voinnes dou cors communes	"for the common veins of the body:"
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins that are visible are thirty-one in number, of which sixteen are on the head: two temporal arteries behind the ears called 'dous herbech'; and two arteries visible in the temples; and two veins in the corners of the eyes called 'aspires'; and one vein in the forehead; and one vein at the nape of the neck; and two jugular veins in the neck; and two veins above the mouth called 'augeherich'.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins commonly used are four in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it runs along the right side, which common people call "the vein of the head"; another is called "the fast", composed of the cephalic and the basilica, which ordinary folk call "the vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the left side, which they call "the vein of the belly", it runs along the forearm and is the one that appears most obviously on the pit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvation vein is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, which has two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one runs below the bend of the pit of the left side, and the second is the saphenous vein on the outside of the right ankle; and the vein called "the nest", which is found at the ankle of the other side; and beneath these are three others in the other leg.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The veins that are behind the ears help with catarrh and headache. The method of letting blood is as follows: raise the patient's head and rub the area where the veins are located with a rough cloth. Then, have the patient tilt their neck back using a vise so that two veins appear behind the ears in two places at the top of the head. Press on these veins with your fingers until you feel the pulse beneath them. Then take a lancet and insert it under the vein up to the bone. Next, lift your hand upwards along the entire length of the vein and cut through both skin and vein using two fingers' width. Make the blood flow out until it is clear enough. Then bandage and tie it tight so that it stops bleeding. I have already discussed incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The letting of blood from the two arteries located in the temples is beneficial for old headaches, sudden migraines, chronic ophthalmia, and the flow of tears. The method is as follows: have the patient tilt their neck back so that both veins appear clearly. Feel the pulse beneath your fingers and then press down firmly. Next, lift your little finger on top of the vein and insert the lancet underneath it. Lift the vein up and cut it, as you did with the other two veins. Let blood flow according to necessity. Then release the patient and place your finger on the vein for an hour before applying cotton. Afterwards, bind it tightly and let it rest until it stops bleeding. We have already spoken about their cauterization and extraction at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bloodletting from the frontal vein is as beneficial as that from the temporal in cases of ancient face diseases, and for migraines and redness. The characteristics are such that the patient strains their neck by twisting until the veins appear; then they take the instrument called "fosseur", here is its form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point upon the vein and strike with your hand or something else, allowing blood to flow according to the amount you desire; then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is sealed, sometimes using a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, be careful not to tie the bandages too tightly; also heal it diagonally because the bone is nearby, and by chance the bandage might break if it's too thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding from the two veins located in the arms aids the eyes, and helps with dizziness, redness, inflammation of the ear, and face diseases. The characteristics of their bleeding are such that the patient strains their neck by twisting, as before; then bleed them, with the incision being long and wide, but not deep, for there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the bandage is too thin, it might break; then allow blood to flow until you have enough, and then tie a cotton pad on top and tie it securely.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The juice of the vein of the nose is good for fever, and sudden madness, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes on the face, especially when it is chronic. And the qualities of this juice are that the patient strains his neck, then strains his nose with your left hand, and takes a long thin reed, and places it inside the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow; and do not go too deep, and make the blood flow according to your need, then leave it overnight, for it is quickly restored. And this is the form of the reed.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The juice of both eyelids helps in the extraction of a thorn, and the beginning of measles, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and eye inflammations. And its qualities are that the patient strains his neck downwards on both sides, as we have said; and let the master stand on top of the patient's head, and the patient sit on one seat, then open the vein of the long one a little widely, then draw blood temperately or as much as needed, then repeat on the other vein, then untie the bandage, and press gently on both veins so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, for the wound to be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	On the healing of limbs
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The treatment for veins above the lips helps with:
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of healing are such that you should make the patient sit before you, and restrain their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, which can be recognized by their black color and the small black veins around them: therefore cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them or are in doubt, then cut the largest from each side, and do likewise for the two veins that are above and below, as this is one and the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	On healing under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The healing of the veins under the tongue assists after the healing of the cephalic vein, and is used for the narrowing of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth. The qualities of the healer are such that the patient should sit between your hands facing the sun, raise their tongue, and look under each side for a black vein: cut both, but do not go too deep, as the arteries lie underneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the arm which are commonly opened in two ways: either by pricking with a broad iron needle or with an olive-shaped, sharp-pointed one called "aneisil"; and they are broad and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	"The shape of the flame of mirt is very well-known, and it is wide as you can see:"
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary for opening the hairy veins filled with thick, visible blood that contain thick and turbid blood; this is the form of the olive-shaped needle:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	"And it is more pointed and sharp, and is for cauterizing small veins where there is thin citrine blood."
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids patients with illnesses in the chest, neck, breast, and abdomen. The operator must perform a skillful incision and beware of the artery beneath it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he strikes the artery and blood begins to flow copiously, it must be staunched as I have said; and the needle should not prick but cut like an aiesil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilisk does not open manifestly, then you must draw it out and change another one; or if you want any vein from it, or if you wish to heal in place of it the vein within the arm: it opens manifestly; and the edge against fire burns, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the place of healing, then before you draw out the arm, touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place above, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein against fire; and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the place swelling, for that is the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see something coming out above like urine from a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: hurry then, and put your hand on firmly, then remove your hand when the bleeding stops, which happens many times; bind the arm and leave it thus, and do not let the patient move it; and be careful, and do not let him move until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	"And if the blood does not stop and you faint, and a physician is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, because its head withdraws. Then stop the bleeding."
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take an escorce of fistice, and split it open, and take one half and bind tightly until the next day; if bleeding stops, good; if not, treat it as we have said with powders that stop blood; and such treatments do not harm in many situations due to the small wound's location and the strength of the arm's binding.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	When opening a vein in the middle, it helps to draw blood from above and below, because it consists of basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said. And the surgeon should beware of the nerve beneath, and if punctured too deeply, and the nerve is found, then swell and the wound may be harmed, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve often appears, but in some men it does not appear due to its thinness, thus you must cauterize it with the needle-shaped instrument; and avoid damaging the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	"And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it lengthwise."
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The bleeding of the cephalic [vein] helps by drawing blood from the head and aids in cases of eyes; it is necessary to bleed into the olive branch vein or the mirror vein, for this is the safest of all veins, as there is neither nerve nor artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the most convenient place and not worry if one fails at first, then one should begin again. And perhaps some places swell in certain people when bleeding happens for the first time, but it does no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	"The quality of cautery depends on your skill."
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it was never used except to maintain health and prevent future illnesses. And the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins located on the arm: namely, cephalic, basilic, or median basilica; and it should be done at the beginning of Lent when fasting, and in autumn and winter after meals, when signs ofpletion appear; and one should bleed on the first day or third day, after two or three hours into the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The salve given to the sick has no fixed time for application, but when needed by day or night, at all hours and times; it is not necessary to apply this salve to children until they are fourteen years old, nor to pregnant women until four months after conception, up to seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	"Nor should old people over sixty years old be cauterized."
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wishes to be salved in any way, it is necessary that they empty the bowels with a light clyster if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful impurities from the intestines into the principal members. One should not salve oneself while excessively full of food or drunk, until the effects have passed, nor those suffering from dropsy. And one should avoid salving after an attack of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, and multiplication of abortions in women, labor, vigilance, fasting, and similar things. Then refine the humors if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power to do so. Then enter a bath if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood, and salve yourself from the vein near the left arm pit on the third day, as we have said. And guard against work, effort, lust, and similar things that day. Be cheerful and joyful, and let the salver be taller than the one being salved. The salver should rub the arms twice or thrice, then squeeze the lien gently over the middle, for if it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow properly. Then moisten the salve with a drop of old oil, and place the knuckle of the left hand's index finger on the vein below where you wish to salve, so that the vein does not swell or split when struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flee like tendons from the sinew, and some such are filled with windiness, so that when heat is applied they withdraw and cannot open the vein, and thus one becomes disabled; and if it closes the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore the surgeons must be skillful in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens at first, that's good. If not, then begin again a little below or above hastily, if the wound is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the wound is swollen and the patient fears it, let it be for one or two days without binding the arm: perhaps an abscess may form; do not enter a bath, then resume the treatment if he pleases. And if the hole is small or blood flows subtly and you doubt that enough blood is issuing forth, then apply heat directly to that opening and work quickly before the wound swells, for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the vein swollen, do not resume cauterizing, and place a little oil balm over it, for it lightens the body's blood, and in this location oil is better than any other balm. And thus administer oil balm in every cautery of veins to stop the flow of blood; and likewise does it work for triacle and bowels of ox when placed on the location; so that blood becomes more subtle and spread out when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess forms there, which happens often, especially when it is not cauterized except at the time of opening the vein and the cut is small, then hurry and place over the location an espongestone moistened in warm water and wine, and hold it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood stops flowing from the vein. And if a black or green color remains at the location afterwards for some days, it will not harm. And if you see this, place over it something of aloes or myrrh mixed in juice of calamint, mastich, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there appears phlegm and swelling during the supporting of the basilica (vein): therefore put your hand on it, and if you find the wound soft under the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be sure not to put on anything of those things that we have said, for perhaps the wound may close up the artery; but make one plaster dry to harden the wound, then cure it with another plaster until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each person according to the quantity of his strength and the color of his blood
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if it flows abundantly, let it flow until it becomes more subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and strong, and has need of bloodletting, that a larger wound be made for him, and the flame be wide; but for one who is weak, the opposite must be done, and he should be let less often, and he should be let by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of letting is free from loss of blood and injury to nerves, and is worth more than that which is done with a long or wide let.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body fails at bloodletting, it is necessary to give him moistened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is overheated, let three or four times blood be drawn from him. And if he is of cold complexion, before the bloodletting let him eat moistened bread in musk syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after losing much blood, then it is necessary that he inhales broth of meat, and fragrant subtle syrup, and uses the other things that we have said in the chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to let out some blood from his arm and be supported again later, when he is weakened by much blood-letting, it is necessary that he should be supported a little at a time according to the quantity of his remaining strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to let out some blood from his arm after the first blood-letting and has a strong body, should be supported again seven hours after the first blood-letting or after nine hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to be supported on another part of his body, should be supported on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	If there is much blood inside the body which has already been heated and causes fever; then it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and widen the opening so that it falls into a basin. Then, when you have corrected all conditions of fainting, place your hand on his pulse as he faints, ensuring that the blood does not fall back into the basin, for this happens many times when the person attending is negligent. And it is not necessary to tie up the arm or press too hard if there are no more veins to draw from, nor to make him extend his arm hastily, for this would be harmful; but let him bleed a second time until he has finished fainting. Or you can cauterize at the point of the flame until the frozen blood at the opening of the vein begins to flow out. Then place some salt soaked in water on it and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has swollen up, let it alone and do not compress it until the inflammation is eased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is necessity to draw blood a second time, then let it out in the same vein or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are supported in place of those in the head because they are composed (i.e., contain many branches).
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of the cauterization is thus: the patient places their hand in hot water until the veins are reddened; then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well; then cut now across, not wide nor long; and let the incision be large, and cauterize near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot flow out, then place the hand back in hot water, and allow the blood to run into the water until you have enough; and if it is summer, do not place the hand again in hot water, for one places it more often in winter than in summer; and the cauterization of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are neither artery nor nerve therein.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The cauterization of the saving vein of the right hand is beneficial for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: constrain the hand, and place it in hot water until the vein swells, so that one may see it; and if you cut across, and cut it entirely all around, nothing will harm; and do not go too deep, as the nerves are all situated beneath the skin, and then place the hand back in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	"And when you have let out as much blood as is needed, then put oil and a bandage on the vein to heal quickly, and do the same for each vein."
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	"The cutting of the vein in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse (epilepsy), and do everything just as I have told you concerning the right hand."
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sap of the soapwort is beneficial for all illnesses below the body, such as those of the womb, and retention of flow, and illness of the kidneys, and of the old hips and legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its sap are such that when the patient places their foot in hot water and rubs the vein until it reddens, and binds above the ankle joint; for the vein is at the ankle, and many kidneys go through there; thus you should choose either the larger kidney or at the ankle, whichever moves more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	"And if you cut it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and cut across just like cutting with scissors; and let the wound heal cleanly."
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	"And if blood cannot flow out, then put the foot back in water and let the vein drain well."
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the sap fails the first time, then apply it again a little higher up, for the place is cold. Do not fear nerve damage, as we have said, and do the same on the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	"The location of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle bone, and its cutting is beneficial for hip pain when it is caused by hot blood."
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its sap is such that the patient enters into a bath and strains above the ankle four times while twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open. And if it opens, then apply the sap in all possible ways and across; and it is better that you tie it off, for the place is dry, and it responds much to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then cut any vein that is open on the back of the foot, near the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and make sure to wipe away as much blood as you see, and then untie the bandage, and put cotton on it and press it; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	And regarding the application of cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	"Cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking."
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping that is done without striking, there are two ways: either it is performed with fire or without fire. And the cupping that is done by striking and extracting blood is performed in fourteen places on the body, of which one is at the very top of the head; another is in the neck; and two others are on both sides of the neck; and the cupping under the chin; and the cupping of both shoulders; and the cupping above the ribs; and the cupping on both arms; and the cupping of both legs; and the cupping of both ankles. And this cupping does not draw blood, except for some small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken at all, as is done with veinletting. And it is not necessary to apply it, neither with fire nor without fire, in any illness caused bypletion, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary due to diseases that one must belch,
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	"And when we see these signs, especially if it is during the month, we order them to cup after three hours of the day."
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The balm of the mouse helps with headaches... that come to the eyes, and it is not necessary for this to occur after evacuation from the whole body; and this ventilation takes place instead of the cephalic salve, and those who are cold by nature should not use it, nor those who have cataracts, as this causes them great harm; therefore old people should not use it, nor those with cold diseases on their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	"And those who often cut themselves become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping a little lower down for fear of forgetting."
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Ventilation between the shoulders takes place instead of the salve for the head and basilica, and it is beneficial for the stretching of the breast, and splitting of the channel of the porcupine, and for coughing and bloating; but not too much should be applied, as if it holds too firmly it can cause dizziness in the stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Ventilation between the second ribs of the neck is beneficial for headaches, and ophthalmia, migraine, and constriction; and for pain in the roots of teeth, and takes place instead of the basilica salve; but you must instruct the user to press their hand while applying it, so that they do not hit the artery or cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	"Cupping under the chin is beneficial for mouth diseases, gum decay, and similar conditions in the mouth, and it is in place of cutting both lips."
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	"Cupping on the shoulders helps with diseases caused by heat andpletion."
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windings of the ribs are worth as much as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins. Command the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, for the place is bare of flesh and full of nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The leech that is placed on the buttock is beneficial for hemorrhoids of the foundation, and for diseases below. It is necessary that the leech be large, and made of brass, so it can draw well; however, if it were delicate, it might break; and it makes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	**Line-by-line translation:**
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the cupping glass is as follows: first apply it empty, and suck temperately, and place it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see that the area is red and swollen, and appears the redness of blood; then stop, and remove the cups, and take care in the position of the body, for there are some who have thin flesh and clear pores: thus one should strike once only, and make wide wounds, but not too deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, then one must strike twice: the first time to refine the passage of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, then one must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out blood drop by drop, it suffices to strike once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we wish for much blood, let us recommence often. And if the blood is thick, pierce deeply, and continue until the point suddenly reaches the heart. But it behooves those with thick and hard skin, and those with narrow pores, to oil the places of the cups with aperitive and dissolvent oil: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, with cress oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluities are thick and cold, use almond oil, or balsam oil, or aniseed oil, or something similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one being treated has tender flesh and wide pores, it is not necessary to apply oil there, but rather, after the bloodletting, wash it with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture should rise using basil water, myrtle water, sumac water, and things of that sort.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have abundant excesses get up in the morning with old wine, or water from a spring, or decoction of anise or camomile, or similar things; and they should not let themselves be cupped before or during the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours; and they should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that they warm themselves when they are about to be cupped and when they are being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware those who are cupped if they are choleric, and if the blood is too thick and inflamed; for they should take cold things, such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce with garlic, and similar things; and eat small fish, and castrated animal flesh, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with cold complexion should take honey syrup, and moderately fragrant wine that is between old and new, and eat pea soup, and small fish and birds, and drink more than they eat on the day they are cupped; and sometimes give trocisc or muscat to some men before or after cupping, to strengthen the main limbs; and let the blood be subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Ventouses placed without piercing are those used on the liver, womb, and for gout, as well as on the belly, buttocks, back, and thighs. These members cannot tolerate being pierced, and one only uses fire to draw blood from member to member, as we do when placing ventouses on the breasts during wet nursing; to remove viscosity from a limb, as we place ventouses on the belly and buttocks to reduce swelling; and to alleviate pain caused by blockage or stones, its attractive power may sometimes draw off the blockage or dislodge the stone from its place. Similarly, it does when placed on the liver and womb if there is retained wind. These ventouses are administered empty for sucking alone, but sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, such as in cases of pleurisy, and so one fills the ventouse with warm water or water in which appropriate herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cup administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And there are two of them wide and half a palm deep, and around the middle on one side there is a small hole like for inserting a needle, made of brass, soft in front so it does not cut the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there is a transverse rod of brass or iron to hold an inserted candle, and they come in various sizes according to the diseases and the age of those who use them; for the cups of children are different from those of old people, and of the thin from those of the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this cup on the limb thus: insert the wax or flax candle and put it across the rod that is in the cup so that the flame is at the bottom of the cup so it does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb with the hole we mentioned above, so that when needed, steam can escape, and remove the cup; and then remove the cloth as before and repeat this often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping procedure used for the disease of pleurisy, especially acute cases, there is no tube or hole, and it is not filled with fire except when it is full of air, and it is placed on the member alone; this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without fire are used cupping procedures only in members where one cannot apply cups due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; also in places devoid of flesh, like the ears or nostrils, and others like them. The quality of using these is that when you find leeches that are in clear, sweet waters without any defect, take them; put them in a jar with sweet water until they become accustomed and have nothing in their bellies; then prepare the vein and cup, rub the member until it becomes red, and place the leeches on it; and when they are full and drop off, if it is a place where one can apply a cup, apply one, for this is very beneficial afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this is not so, then lift the wound gently, and then with water, very well, and then press it; and if the wound bleeds too much after the body of the veins, then moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place upon it, until the blood is staunched; and if the blood is multiplied, then place powdered vitriol or gall, and similar things, until it is staunched; or you may place on the wound half of peeled fava beans, and leave them until they adhere to the wound, now it will staunch.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the veins do not take hold, then rub the wound with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until some blood comes out, and then place them upon it, and as soon as they sense the blood, they will adhere; and when you see that they are full, then powder some aloe and celery seed, ground up, or ash, and now they will fall off.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	"Here begins the book of fractures"
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	"This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and is a remedy for fracture and dislocation."
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that foolish physicians throw themselves into this chapter without ever having seen any of the old books or read any letter concerning it; and thus, knowledge is lacking in our land, for I found none who was good at it. And I know nothing except through the science of ancient books which I have studied so much that I have treated the science therein, and by experience, and by the habit of my life. And I have described for you in this chapter what is contained therein, and abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of instruments arranged as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	"It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of our words and chapters where the wise devote their understanding and remain on the path of truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art and teach it to others."
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or contusion occurs to anyone, you must promptly advise the patient on both sides, unless there is some impediment such as weakness of body or childhood or old age, or if the time is not very hot or too cold; and avoid eating cold foods, specifically cold drinks, and the flesh of birds and hares, and do not drink wine nor eat fatty meats, nor fill oneself too much with foods that congest the veins with blood, until you doubt a hot aposteme or an expansion of matter in the limb. Thus, the patient should return to their usual regimen that they had been following.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	"And when the fractured bone begins to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that promote growth and have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, and similar foods, along with abundant wine."
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	"For with this kind of nourishment, muscle tissue is regenerated and healing occurs more quickly."
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of the elderly and decrepit cannot be well reset or mended according to their nature due to weakness in the limbs, nor those that are too tender like the bones of young children. But there is a remedy: apply large splints that hold and join the limb together until it regains its former strength; do not break any part of the bone, and for this reason, it must be nourished with thick foods as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	"And know that fractures are diverse in many ways."
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	"For a fracture of the head is different from one of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures."
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	"There are fractures that occur suddenly, like when falling from a height, and others that occur gradually, such as carving a quill for writing."
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	"And there is fracture with wounding, and fracture with just a slight crack."
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each type of fracture there is its own device and appropriate tool in restoring it according to where the pain occurs. Fractures are known by the twisted appearance at the site, which can be clearly felt upon examination, and heard when pressing with the hand. When there is no twisting or sound upon touching and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture; however, there may still be some twisting, splitting, or minor fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	"So do not move the limb by hand but apply the medicines mentioned below and then gently immobilize it."
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break which goes into a tree, and are the two parts dislocated, it is necessary to set them together evenly before an abscess comes; and if an abscess comes quickly, let it remain some days until the abscess quiets; then place it evenly on the move that you can easily move it smoothly, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restorations of those where there are pieces; then bind it as it should be hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken into pieces and is in two parts, whether it's a hand or foot, or for a small limb use your hand, or use two cords or one cord and your hand; and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, join them back together with all means at the movement you can, and make sure in your work that the patient does not get injury or pain; and fit the two ends of the bones well according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	"Moreover, one can feel it well with the hand if it seems not to be in its proper place; raise it gently and do not strain or press it too much as those who cause heat and tension in the limb through their work."
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, caution the patient well that they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning nor in any other manner; and ensure the limb is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And when it feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it must be put into such a position that it feels no pain; and ensure it is set correctly, so that no crookedness comes when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	"Know that broken limbs vary in size, shape, and extent."
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	But for small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones: they must be wrapped in soft, thin linen cloths; and those that are large, like thighs and calves: they must be wrapped with a wide, strong bandage, because the wide bandage embraces the whole large limb and constrains it evenly on all sides so there is no tightening. Then tie it around with light pads, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand somewhat on the whole bandage. Then go above the break and tighten less so that the break can be slightly separated from the break; and soften the bandage bit by bit until you grasp much of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it again around the broken area. Then return to the part below the break and tighten moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said above in the first binding. Then place between the bandages linen pads or cloths until it is all even, then tie everything together with one bandage on top, and then place your well-made splints upon it if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or abscess, then place over it something that soothes the hot abscess and removes the swelling, leaving it thus for several days; then press upon your elbow joints, using as supports half of a wide cane reed soaked in water, or wood used to make stakes, or date palm rachis, each according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the elbow support placed on the fracture must be a bit thicker and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as necessary for the limb's size or thickness. Then press upon the supports just as you did at the first joint, then tie above with a suitable thread, as in the first binding over the breakage; draw tighter gradually, less often; and ensure that the threads are medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their bindings from twisted linen cords, this is a great mistake, because the binding cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two fingers' breadth between each support.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the stars after binding in sound places, then place underneath them lint or woolen bandage so that he does not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When there is a wound with the fracture and the bones are broken, I will speak of its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that one must not bind all broken members with stars on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	When the limb is large, it is not necessary to put on bandages for more than 6 or 7 days, or even longer according to your certainty about the heat of the swelling. Here is the method of ancient plasters used to heal fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of eggs, and apply this mixture - not too thick nor too thin - and use it; this is the common way to make a plaster that restores fractures in many cases, especially for women and children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of emplaste restoring fractures and dislocations and distortions: Take aloes and ladanum and fennel and asarabac and tragacanth and myrrh and aloewood, all together nine parts; mastic three parts; aloechy three parts; and make powder of them, and mix with plenty of eggs; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this emplaste, for it has good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method for plasters useful in twists: take mugwort and wormwood each 10 drams; myrrh and aloe each 9 drams; acacia 6 drams; bolus armeniacum 10 drams, grind well, mix with water or plenty of eggs, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method for the emplastering of joints and bones displaced from their places, alleviates pain occurring, and sharpens bone setting, and for fractures: take new linen, wet it in warm water and oil cooked, then apply to the place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore (the dislocation), but is good for soothing a hot boil, and properly removes pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth peony leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plastering for the healing of bone fractures and to soften the swelling around the boil.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of mallows, camomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each one part; grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is inflamed, mix it with diluted coriander water or water, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of plaster stronger than the first one, when a hard boil comes to the healing of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of mallows, linseed, balm, melilot, celery, violet and camomile flowers, each one part; grind, mix with salt water or fresh water or wine according to the warmth of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not apply anything to a broken limb for restoring strength besides wax and oil ointment; he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And according to Galen, one should apply slightly warm dry substances like myrrh, aloe, frankincense, and similar things to a broken limb for restoring it, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat injury and pain is to take mastic, chewed barley grains or chicken feathers, and silkworms, crush them together with equal amounts of salt, and make an ointment from the mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, after a little while, undo it [the bandage] and make sure the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, do not undo it for many days. And if pain comes at that place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry up, undo it, and remove the dressing immediately; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift it to the place until the itching stops, and the pain is eased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, on top, and tie it on with a knot, until you are sure of a hot abscess. And let the inflammation of the member subside, and let the pain be removed, then start the tying again gently, and a little bit of dressing, and do not pull too hard as before; and continue until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the blister is hot, red, painful and swollen, has disappeared completely, and you still need ointment and bandages, then resume them again as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If no improvement is seen in the limb from what we have said, do not attempt to dislocate it until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; sometimes wait up to 20 days, as long as the bonesetters' fracture starts to heal and the flesh begins to close over; then you may attempt to restrain more firmly than before, and encourage flesh growth. But if the joint appears drier than necessary, know that nutrition cannot reach it; therefore apply warm water compresses whenever you dislocate it, doing so every third day, and slacken the bandage a little. By this method, nutrition will quickly come to the limb and remedy what foolish physicians do when they improperly reset limbs.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various kinds of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of fractures there are, with diverse shapes, and their causes are distinguished. For there are fractures caused by the impact of a sword blow, which shatters the bone all the way down to the marrow beneath it, like a hatchet in wood; and for this reason, this type of fracture is called 'hatchet-like'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing it, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and wounds from these two fractures are large or small in size.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussive impact, such as striking with the butt of a rock, falling onto stone, or similar events.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture that approaches the membrane beneath the bone or above it, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And there is a wound that is pressed into the bone as fine as a horse's hair, and the crack is small, and for this reason it is called 'capillary' fracture. And if the wound is made by striking with stone or falling or similar cause, and causes a piece of bone to enter inward, and the place is raised like when coppersmiths strike on cauldrons; then the stones enter therein.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often in those with moist porous bones, such as the head of a child. And it occurs in all these types of fractures that small pieces are dislodged like stars.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all kinds of fractures by their withdrawal from the bone, and by careful examination, and by corrupted flesh that lies upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	A hairline fracture is recognized by the fact that when the bone is exposed and rubbed gently, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating a fracture, beware of possible complications such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, and extension of the limb, pallor, fever, eyes protruding or turning red, etc. If any of these occur, recovery will not be without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not observe any alarming complication, and you hope for a good outcome, then begin the treatment
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the injured person first comes to you, especially if it is wintertime, remove the bone within fourteen days after the injury.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is summertime, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane beneath the bone does not become corrupted and the complications we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must cut open the broken part thus: and take hold of the patient's head with great care, and uncover the bone in all possible ways, gently revealing the wound's figure; and if bleeding or hot swelling appears during bone exposure, help as needed. Then fill the place with woolen pads soaked in rose oil, allowing the wound to rest until the heat subsides and you are sure there is no more bleeding. Then begin removing bone around it in two ways of operation: one way is by narrow cutting in front.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	"And then I add another cut larger than the first."
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	"And the second way is that you have many different cuts, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made of tin, and work lightly so as not to injure the head."
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	"And if the bone is hard and rough, then you must pierce it around beforehand before administering cuts with trephines so that they do not go too deep and pierce through the soft bone. The point should have a margin or circle on top to prevent it from going too far into the bone; and you should have several trephines so that each one fits properly onto the radius of the bone, allowing for all types of bones."
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	"The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place a trephine on the bone and turn it with both hands until you know that the bone is pierced. Then move the trephine to another spot a little later and do this all around, then cut away the space of bone between the perforations with scissors as subtly and lightly as possible so that you can easily remove the bone by hand or with any of your tools such as forceps; be careful not to touch the cerebellum or cerebrum."
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and scraped it, then it is necessary that you reset the sharp edge that remains of the bone with all other similar instruments to an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the others; and if there remain any small bones or scales, remove them gently with the tools; then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	"And another way of operating is that which Galen recommends, which is quicker; he praises it highly, and this is his opinion."
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	"Firstly, you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is most visible. Then, once this part has been uncovered, place the lenticular trephine on top of it, as shown below:"
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side only, for the part is sharp on both sides, so that the cutting edge faces towards the bone; then strike gently with a small hammer, so that you break the bone evenly all around, and be careful of the cloth beneath it; if it adheres to the bone, remove it gently, for it can be removed without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	"And if the bone fracture does not reach the flesh, and the bone is cut only on one side with small fragments remaining, then you should remove this roughness. Use a fine rasp in various quantities to best fit the work and shape of the fracture."
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	"Use coarse rasps first, then finer ones, until it is smooth."
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	"For each of the other cuts and fine fractures, you must adapt your approach according to its direction; this is something that cannot be learned from those who have studied this art."
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the sinew is exposed, it is necessary that you take one cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled into two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this as gently as possible so that you do not burden the sinew, then apply a bandage above it, but do not tie it too tightly, only enough to moisten the wound; and leave it thus for one or two days until the swelling is reduced, then untie it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, iris flour, frankincense powder, aristologium, and similar things; and make a powder of these things and place it on the wound, and apply warm medicinal ointments without biting; and ensure that the wound is always clean, leaving no ointment nor allowing flies to gather on the brain cloth, for when flies gather upon the brain cloth, they will corrupt and poison it, causing great harm to the patient; for when something irritating is placed on the sinew, it becomes necrotic above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	"Therefore, if any bad accidents occur to the patient, as we have said, be very cautious and doubtful without doubt."
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackness appears on it due to the medicine applied there, which may have such power, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix it with one drachm of gum; then apply it to the face; then follow the usual methods of treatment until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one alone, for they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous and does not break unless struck or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two bones is broken, then place your little finger or a hollow reed over it and insert the break evenly into the space between your index finger and thumb, pressing gently until the bone returns to its natural shape; do this carefully so that the patient does not feel pain from your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you must place a small wooden stick against it to hold it steady.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two pieces, then do likewise; and hurry to reset it on the first day if possible. If not, after the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided, then wrap a bandage of linen cloth around the head of the bone where the break occurred.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you set one bone against another on the opposite side, if there is a fracture there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some physicians say one should grease the tents with butter and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem good to me that they should be greased with butter and changed every day. Rather, they must be greased with a mixture of egg white and flour powder, then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes feathers from a goose are used instead of bandages, and if there is one soft cloth around them, the fracture will stay in place and the patient will feel better; now do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if any swelling comes to the nose while you are working on it, then put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil or in a drop of diachylon there.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no abscess forms there, then apply a plaster made of ground sesame seeds and incense powder, mixed with egg white. Then place light bandages on top without tying them tightly. And if the fracture is small but shattered into many pieces, extract it using appropriate tools, then sew up the wound and treat it according to usual care for such things; binding, suturing, etc., using appropriate plasters and ointments. If there are no wounds inside the nose, then treat with tents and insert splints of lead until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	de la routure de la mandibule
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken underneath and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only apparent and not broken in two pieces except for small fragments inside, then it is easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary that if the fracture is on the right side, you put your two index fingers in the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then put your two index fingers of the right hand inside gently and hold it with your other hand from outside and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in two pieces, then you must apply traction from both sides until it is even and aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of teeth or fracture, then tie them with a thread of gold, silver or silk, then put cerate on the broken jawbone and put a double cloth over it; then put a large well-made bandage or a piece of leather the same size as the jawbone, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it under the chin that you can see, and command the patient to rest and chew light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day and then put back in place what has changed; then put a plaster made of flour with egg yolk or sesame flour after removing the cerate; then put light linen over the plaster, and if the plaster dries up and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is well; many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come, then apply what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, be sure that no piece of bone has been taken out. Then carefully extract it with appropriate instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when you have removed all these fragments, and none remain, then stitch the wound, if it is wide, and apply one of the suitable emplasters to cauterize, so that it may heal."
de la forcele	"with great strength"
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceful blow strikes several times before, toward the shoulder, and the break is in one of three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, with fragments, which is easiest to reset; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatment is when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants: one holds the arm that feels the force of the break; and the other extends the neck towards the part. Then place the break evenly in your two hands, so that the form is as it should be, neither twisted nor crooked.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place under the shoulder of the patient a round pad made of cloth or wool, and it should be thick according to your need. Then stretch and lift the forceful blow, and hold the pad with your hand so that you can set the break evenly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the forceful blow outward because it comes from deep inside, then the patient must lie on their back with their shoulders hanging down, and place a medium pillow under the shoulder. Then have the assistant push the shoulder downward until the bone of the forceful blow is lifted up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then align the break with your two hands, and if it is misaligned, you must cut upward. Then pull out the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot meet due to any obstacle, then use one of the chisels that you have to scrape it away. But place this instrument under the forceful blow to ward off the sinews.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it resembles a spoon, and is not raised, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the width of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of hot abscess, then cut the wound, and if the opening is small, or you doubt hot abscess, then cover the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot inflammation comes, then soak a bandage in rose oil mixed with honey and vinegar and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	To reset the bone without wounds or cuts, you should place on the bone the plaster made of ground millstone and egg white, and put light bandages on top, and place a splint under the armpit if needed; then take a very large bandage about a palm wide, and place a double cloth over the bandages and plaster; then take a subtle belt three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and place the belt on the break, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the injured armpit; and tighten each part, and when you see that the binder holds the break well, and you clearly see that the belt does not move over the broken bone, then wrap it every day, and when the ligaments relax, then bind it more tightly; and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the armpit to lift the shoulder up; thus relieve the pressure of the break by relieving the tension of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless something bad happens, for up to 20 days; then restart the plastering if necessary, and tighten it and leave it like that until it is healed; and it will be healed in the most part within 28 days, and in less time with some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Regarding the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the shoulder bone is broken or displaced, it cannot be felt except by touch; then arrange it according to the shape of the break and reset it according to its natural form in every way you can. Then place flour mixed with egg on the joint along with light bandages, and cover it with a double cloth. Then place a wide, thin board slightly larger than the shoulder over it, and if there are any hairs beneath the board on some part of the shoulder, fill those hairs with linen wicks so that the board lies evenly. Then bind it firmly all around with a large bandage so that the board does not move from its position. Check the binding each day, and every time it loosens, tighten it again. If the board has shifted from its place, reposition it evenly, and have the patient lie on their side. The shoulder will be reset in 20 or 25 days. Once this period is complete, remove the bandage, but be sure that it's not an easy bone to dislocate lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out in front and there is nothing under it to support it, then cut it off and do what we have said for healing hot inflammation in cases of shoulder dislocation.
de la brisure dou pis	Regarding the break of the arm
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The flesh is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the back.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it sags downwards, and the patient feels great pain, loss of appetite, faintness, and sometimes vomiting blood; and the cheeks appear hollow at the site of the broken bone.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the healing of this break is as follows: have the patient lie frequently on their back with a pillow between their shoulders. Then press down on the shoulders and bring together the ribs of the two sides at the hands using all possible care to make the bone figure straight. Then place plasters and dressings on top of a thin strip of salt or light wood, wrap it in a cloth, and tie it onto the broken bone so that it does not move. Wind the wrapping around the back and bind it firmly, checking the dressing every hour. If it becomes loose, tighten it again. If it needs to be untied due to corruption, itching, pain, or inflammation, do so quickly and remove the plaster. Then redo the plaster and binding as needed until the bone is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Regarding the break of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that rib fractures only occur in the thick parts near the back and at the front of the chest, and they only bend when they are brittle. The pain is felt sharply with each breath two fingers' width from the spine.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment for this is that you set the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a splint, and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is angled inwards, the patient feels intense pain and sharpness like that of pleurisy, because the bone is pressing on the lung. The patient may have chills, faintness, and vomiting a large amount of blood, which indicates serious condition. In ancient times, this was considered very dangerous.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	"Moreover, there are those who say it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly to reduce displacement."
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	"We do not do this, unless highly skilled physicians have come and seen it firsthand."
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	"And if it has come, then heal it."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	"And they said that one should apply cupping jars to the place to draw out the moisture strongly, and this seems reasonable. However, there is doubt as to whether the cups will actually draw out the excess fluids due to weakness of the body."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	"And they said that one should cover the place with wet wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to hold it evenly in place. Then treat it with the cure for pleurisy using meat and medication."
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone protruding through the skin, causing doubt for the patient, then one must cut over the site of the broken rib and place an instrument underneath to guard the lung; and then one should trim the bone and gently pull it out, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and apply splints until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes suddenly, place moistened cloths in rose oil on it and apply them to the spot. And treat the spot with what is necessary for an abscess, and have him lie constantly on his side where it is.
de la brisure dou col	Here's how you can ask about "la brisure du col" (the fracture of the neck) in Old French:
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes breakage occurs at the bones of the neck, rarely does it bend; likewise at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if he will recover or not, take note if his hands are softened, swollen, and numb, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many situations, and if he moves them and feels when they are stretched or pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and that the patient will be cured with treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will recover or not, take note if his feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in hands are also on the back, and windiness and excretion come forth without will; and when one lies him down on his belly, excretion comes forth without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he lies on his back to saddle himself, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Such are the mortal ones: do not labor in their care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not occur, then the condition is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that if there is a hot inflammation, you should apply rose oil or oil of mallow seed to the spine until it is cooled down. Then apply a comforting and drying emplaster, secure it with a linen bandage, and command the patient to rest; and they should not sleep on the part where they feel pain until they are recovered.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, you must couch the patient on their back. Remove the displaced bone and then bring together the two lips of the wound if it is large by sewing them up with a suture. Then treat it with ointment for wounds until healed. And if the joint of the bone is broken, which is called the “joint of the cow,” you should put your left hand pouch in place of the bone and support it with your other hand using all your strength. Then apply the emplaster and bandage if necessary, bind it tightly, and if there are displaced bones, open them up and remove them, then treat the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Regarding the fracture of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens rarely that the thighbone is broken, and if it does happen, there will be a slight loss of consciousness at the head. The wound opens up lengthwise and slopes towards the knee, causing pain and sharpness in the area where it has been broken. Swelling occurs where the bone has snapped.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you should extend your hand over the break until you are able to locate it. Know what type of fracture it is and its shape. And if the fracture is only at the top, then bring the fracture into alignment so that it is in its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is lengthwise or slopes inward, have the patient lie on their stomach so that you can see the alignment of the fracture clearly.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And once you have aligned it, apply an emplaster and then place a splint made of wood or bone. Bind the fracture tightly so that it does not move, and support the area below the hips until the alignment is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if there is an inflammation around the wound, do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided. Then apply what was mentioned earlier and return to the reduction of the fracture, binding it as necessary if there are no complications. This is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Regarding the fracture of the humerus
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The humerus is the bone between the elbow and the shoulder joint. If it is broken, it should be reduced in one of two ways:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie two joints with two strings,
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	"And the other manner is thus: place the patient on their back, and have them raise their hand to their neck. Then command two ministers: one shall grasp what is above the fracture at their hands, and the other shall grasp below at just one line, each stretching according to their part."
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then restrain the ligaments below and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then you must place one ligament in the middle under the saddle, and another towards the elbow, under the fracture; and likewise if the fracture is towards the elbow, then you must place the ligament lightly without effort until the fracture is even on its place and on the elbow; then set the fracture evenly as it should be, and bind it if an abscess appears.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	"And if inflammation occurs, do not bind until it has subsided for seven days. Apply a damp linen cloth moistened in axle oil and rose oil until the inflammation has decreased. Then bind as follows: place the splint on the fracture, bring the arm up to the sling, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast. Place the bandage and bind over the sling and arm so that the arm is in line with the stars, unless something prevents it from doing so, or if the bone has been moved."
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	"And if you suspect that the bone is not setting properly, use stars and place a larger and stronger one on the fracture than the others. Place two fingers' width between each star, and let each star be so large that it extends three fingers beyond either side of the fracture. Then bind over the stars as I have described at the beginning of this chapter, binding more firmly and not allowing any separation."
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the setting of the splints and the binding as we have said in the time when you restore the broken limb, and if you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it tied for seven days as we have said; then examine each ligament every three days to ensure that there is no itching or swelling at its place, lest nourishment cannot reach the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, then untie him only after 3 days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach. Place one pillow full of wool evenly under the shoulder, and watch every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the ligatures do not soften. Then apply the ointment by the power of medicine, and give him the food we mentioned earlier in such a way that at first it is subtle; and when he begins to recover, make it thicker.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset 40 days after; then one must untie him and administer baths and ointments to set the limb straight.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is ugly and jammed in, let it remain 50 days or two months before untieing.
de la brisure du bras	Here is a summary of the instructions given for reducing and immobilizing a broken arm:
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones called the "fuscile," one of which is small and guides the wrist; the other is large and located beneath it near the little finger. Sometimes only the large bone breaks, or sometimes only the small one does, but sometimes both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the little bones are broken, restoration is easy, and healing; but when the big ones are broken, healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the little bone is broken, then it needs to be gently stretched out and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	But if it's the big bone, then it needs to be stretched more forcefully; and lay it out on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the little finger hang lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross themselves over themselves, and put the cushion in front of them higher up so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the minister's left arm to the part below his hand or elbow, and another minister to the other above it.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then let the master put it back together according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces missing, then place each one back in its proper position; and if there is any bone that cannot be grasped by the hand, and you are unable to restore it to its place, then saw through it and join the bones together, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is also an open wound with the fracture, I have spoken about that in the chapter on open wounds; take care accordingly.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	But if at the beginning of restoration wounds appear hot, then apply a bandage made of cerote cloth soaked in rose oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and tie the bandage gently on top so that the hot wounds are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the fat, and place the emplaster of powdered millet with abundance of egg, then place the splints, ensuring that the one for breaking is stronger and somewhat wider than the others; and know that it should have six splints on the arm in various arrangements: whether the break is in one bone or two; and bind tighter above the break than elsewhere, and always looser as you go along, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are placed on the break be soft and moist, not hard or harsh; and let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the limb and the bandage after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wash the limb with warm water until that itching is appeased; and let the limb rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin the strapping, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone dislocated, and similar things, then adjust it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care that the swelling does not come to the limb because it is too tight, then you should soften it a little and leave it thus for a few days until the swelling has gone down, then tie it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	But if none of these things we have mentioned come to the patient, do not untie him for up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or whoever around him then let him hang his hands on his neck and keep them even, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and sometimes in twenty, according to the compositions and temperaments of the humors.
de la brisure de la main	Chapter on the Fracture of the Hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and the back of the wrists there are few fractures, but many twists occur there.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or twisted, then let the patient sit cross-legged and sit upright before him evenly; then place his hand on the table, and extend the fractured bones, and align them correctly with the help of the surgeon until they are properly joined together; then apply the plaster and splints, if there are no wounds, then apply a bandage according to the size of the wound; and wrap it in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	"And if the break is on the outside around the belly of the foot, make a bandage of cloths and command the patient to bind it to their broken foot; then bind with a long cloth strip, and let the knot be soft as large as the sole of the hand, and bind it tightly."
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	"And if the break is on the front, then you must place a bandage above it and another below in the sole so that the hand is open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and secure the knot between the two."
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	"And if the break comes on any of our fingers, if it is the thumb, then set it equal as it should be; and bind it with the sole, and if you see fit place a small straight bandage to raise the broken part, and do not move it. And if the break is on another finger, such as the index or one of the others, then set it equal, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or bind them all together in one bandage, whichever is better, or place a bandage like that on the thumb, and take care in the healing and arrangement of hot poultice, and treat what comes from it as I have said."
de la cuixe brisie	"for a broken thigh"
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns front and back; and its restoration is done by binding one bandage above the break and another below."
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	"And the patient lies on their face, then each helper extends their bandage to their side evenly; and this is when the break is in the bone."
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligaments should be towards the knife, and the other ligament below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And likewise if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be by the knee, and let the extension be below; then let the surgeon set the bone even with both hands until it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the splint, and tie it up, provided no abscess occurs.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	"And if there is a hot poultice, let it cool down and then return to your task and care; the bandaging is done in this manner."
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the fracture with a hard doubled bandage twice or thrice, and let the excesses remain; then twist the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee joint, and bring the ends of the thread upwards; then wrap the leg and hip with the bandage again, then place splints on the fracture, and place one splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and hip with soft cloths to make the pressure even; then begin to tie firmly three or four times on the fracture; and when higher up on the fracture, it is less tight; then turn to the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the leg and hip, and tie three splints that are above, then return downwards to the end of the thread until you reach near the foot; and make it tight so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus; until there appears neither inflammation nor swelling nor anything similar.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	"And if something comes from it, untie it and address what comes as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone sticking out, then remove them if possible; and if not possible, then cut open the space and extract it; and treat it as we have said until it is healed."
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	"And sometimes the thighbone breaks in such a way that splints are placed on it, like in the case of the arm; nonetheless, with this kind of treatment, the patient does not limp."
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	"And know that the thighbone is restored in one week, or a little less or a little more, depending on the different constitutions."
de la ruelle dou genoil	"of the crease of the knee"
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know this: In the groove of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then it is only a fracture or hole, and this happens in all wounds, and without wounds, which everyone knows.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the reset is done by placing what is round on its two sides until it can be moved together; then put the bandage, and put a round splint if you need one, and bind it as necessary; then check all the arrangements that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as heat and similar appearances; then apply to each accident whatever is needed until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know this: The leg has two bones, of which one is rightly called the "fibula," and the other is called the "tibia"; and all birds have a similar breakage when it comes to the arm, and therefore their restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg twists in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fibula is broken, it twists forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, great pain is felt and it is clearly visible; and it turns downward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore apply traction, place it evenly, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly with many pieces, then traction should be lighter and gentler, and raise according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, then take two strips of flexible wood that wrap around the leg on both sides and are long from the knee downwards; then wrap these two strips with two bandages above and below, and tie them in the middle as well, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left at this joint, and this is good. And some arrange a splint of wood the length of the leg, and place the leg on it to prevent movement, and this is done properly when there is a wound near the fracture; and move the leg every day to see if there is heat or other accident; then treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the fractures of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a fracture comes to the bones of the foot and to the toes, and there is only shaking in many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones protruding one over the other, then place your foot on the ground like someone who wants to walk, and then place your foot on theirs where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places; then apply the splint and dressings, and put a small table with two holes under the sole of the foot, and then bind it tightly around the foot, and wrap it with bandages and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the toes are broken, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the broken toe and a little wider, then place that table I spoke of under the foot and bind it tightly; and if there are two or three or more broken toes, then place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the table under the foot; and let them stand on top of the table so that they touch the sole of the foot well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And do not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, and treat each accident according to its need.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the fracture of the bone of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the woman's hip bone is broken, make her sit wide-legged, then incline her toward the back part, and have her held from behind. Then fill the socket of the woman with cotton, packing it as much as one fist. Then raise the woman up, bit by bit, and slowly the cotton will come out until it reaches the entrance of the socket, and the bone will return with the fist. And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton. And after she has urinated, replace it, and do this for about seven days or so: then the break will be healed. And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube at the hole, and insert the whole bladder into the socket. Then blow into the tube forcefully until the bladder is full inside; then the socket will return to its proper place. Then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the little finger of man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said regarding the thighbone. Such fractures are not hidden from one who applies study and practice, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture indicates in many cases the correct path for restoration; therefore, understand this.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's craw and put the penis into it; then wrap bandages around it and leave it for three or four days or so, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be cauterized immediately, so that the cauterization which we have described may testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, then apply the plaster of vitriol, or whatever else you have, and then begin to reset the fracture at that same hour, or on that day, if there is no inflammation.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if inflammation is present, then leave the reduction until a new day, until the inflammation has subsided, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would thereby cause harm.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone which has been broken appears above the exposed heart, then it is necessary that you put it back together lightly with your hands, using slight traction.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if traction does not allow you to align the bone ends with your hands, then use this tool made of iron, which is 27 or 28 inches long and its width corresponds to the size of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary for the surgeon to prepare three or four of them, according to what he needs in each case of fracture, and they should be round and somewhat thick so that they do not bend under pressure on the member where you are working, and they should have a pointed end at the front, and be thicker in the middle, as follows:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called 'palainche', therefore the curved head of the bone should be placed on the protruding bone; press once until it returns to its original position, ensuring both sides are even.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is slight and tools cannot grasp the bone well, you must chop off the head of the bone until tools can hold it firmly.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you are unable to reduce the bone as we have described, then cut off a piece of an appropriate tool, such as a chisel or scalpel, with all your might; then remove the rough edges and small splinters that remain on the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is reset but the patient still feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you ensure it is in its natural place, then moisten a cloth in black stiptic wine and apply it if it is summer. Do not use cerote or other oily substances on the wound as they cause decay. Then provide support after resetting the bone, leave the wound uncovered, cut away the surrounding skin according to the size of the wound, and ensure that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; many foolish physicians have done this causing harm or death to patients. Make sure the bandage is softer and more flexible than usual for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may come of it, as we have said, and you find pain at its location, do not place hot coals on it; but wrap hard cloths around it instead.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when after one or two days you see that the wound has begun to suppurate, then remove what you placed on it before any wine, and apply healing ointment to it, such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to dress the member twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is united and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the member be positioned in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and the bone still cannot heal but continually swells up again, know that there are small pieces of bone present which cause this pain. Therefore, you must probe the wound with a tent and remove all these unwanted pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula appears at the location, or another type of corruption, then you must treat it according to what is said in this chapter earlier.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the hip or shoulder bone, and other similar ones of large limbs, do not attempt to pull it out because many times death results. Rather, leave it alone until it rots, perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you are able; but if you cannot, then leave it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Chapter on fractures that occur on the union
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times, after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, the appearance of the limb is unpleasant to see, and sometimes the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore be careful if the nail is fresh: you should administer stypptic medicines such as aloes, frankincense, myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others. Take some of these things or all together and combine them with stypptic wine or with egg yolk or with mustard; put them on the wound in poultices and tie it tightly, not untied for many days; then remove it and begin again another one until the node has been removed. Or you can apply a well-made piece of lead; for the property of lead is to remove all swellings from the limbs. And if the node has already turned into hardness like stone and needs to be removed, then cut it open above and remove the excess apparent matter. Or you can have it shaved by some barber until it is removed, then treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Chapter on members that are weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone has been restored and afterwards the member remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was tied too tightly, and not tied as it should have been. Or because there were too many bandages, and the nourishment could not reach the member. Or because of excessive bleeding. Or because of too much movement, not at the right time. Or because there was little blood in his body, so he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to make the patient eat well and exercise his body so that blood is multiplied in him. And administer baths, give him joy and amusement. Then apply pitch on the member so that it attracts great nourishment, and frequently anoint it with warm water until nourishment reaches the member, and return it to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Chapter on members twisted after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration,
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the dislocation is removed by rubbing continually and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And arrange movement of the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	"And if the tortuosity is hardened and calcified like stone, so that it needs to be cut away with iron, then one must cut through it up to the bone with a fine, light scalpel. And take care and apply oneself in the treatment."
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	"Here begins the book of dislocations."
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	"A dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its proper place, preventing it from moving; the limb is misaligned and the patient feels great pain and injury."
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	"When dislocation occurs in someone, it must be reduced without delay."
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	But if one waits, the place swells up, and sometimes it cannot be reset well; therefore one should not move the limb when it is swollen: many times it causes spasms and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient lie down, then leave him until the inflammation has subsided; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each limb as it comes back into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	"And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from head to foot."
des mandibules	"of the jaws"
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	"It happens rarely that the jaws become dislocated within themselves, and there are two ways in which both can be dislocated: either they are somewhat displaced from their proper places and softened somewhat; or else they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the chest, preventing saliva from entering the mouth, so that he cannot keep his mouth closed nor speak clearly."
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	"If the dislocation is slight, it can be reduced by several methods."
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly, without delaying; and in such a way that the assistants hold the patient's head, and the surgeon places one hand with a pouch into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands should be free to apply pressure evenly; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the master makes it even until it returns to its place
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the return is difficult, especially if it's both jaws at once, then apply hot water and oil so that they move easily; do not force the return, as we have said
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well without softening, then place moistened cloths in wax made from rose oil and wax, then lightly bind with soft linen; and let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows so that it does not move to either side or strain itself to chew, but take light food until the pains are gone and the jaw is healed; and then they may chew what they wish easily, and need not trouble opening their mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be properly reduced within an hour and are not returned to their places, then fever and trembling will ensue, and sometimes diarrhea and possibly vomiting of clear bile may occur
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see these signs, know that it is a lost case; and many times the person dies within eight days
de la forcelle	Of lockjaw
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	Lockjaw cannot be dislocated from the side inward and is sometimes dislocated downward; this can be felt
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the resetting is such that the patient lies often on their back and extends their arms; then press it firmly with your palm, and it will return; then place the emplastrum and the bandage, and bind it; and the shoulder which is towards the side cannot dislocate again; if it does not, and if it dislocation happens any time, then reset it to its place as we have said; then place the emplastrum and the bandage, and bind it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed; and similarly is reset the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder dislocates in only three ways: one is when it dislocates towards the side of the hip below; and the second is at the part of the breastbone; rarely does it dislocate above, but this happens little; nor does it dislocate behind due to the shoulder, nor inside due to the nerves. And often it dislocates downwards towards the hip, especially in those with a lot of flesh, for they jump quickly and dislocate hastily; while those who have less flesh, it jumps hardly at all, and returns hardly at all.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes some people suffer a blow or fall and the shoulder becomes swollen with a hot inflammation, and they think that it is dislocated because of this
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must examine it to make certain, and then begin treatment
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocations are recognized when they occur downwards towards the hip, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, which you will find manifestly different. You will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and below the hip touching the head of the shoulder as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring their hand near to their neck nor move in any way. And likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it manifestly upon touching it. This manner of dislocation is difficult to reset when it is old or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the practitioner to raise the patient's hand upwards and then place their fists underneath the socket and pull up forcibly with the joint until it returns to its place
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in a few days afterward, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and let him be gently rubbed with mollifying and soothing ointment, such as a decoction of mallow and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be applied. Then let the patient lie on his back, and place under his shoulder blade a pad of even wool, not too soft nor too hard. Then the physician places his heel on the pad, and gently lifts the head of the shoulder, and pulls the hand of the patient; and another servant holds the head of the patient so that it does not move down. That shoulder comes back straightaway, and if you wish to reset it according to this manner: have present a man who is taller than the patient; let him stand upright beside the patient's side, and place his shoulder under the patient's shoulder blade, and lift the shoulder up, so that the patient hangs from the arm. And another servant pulls the hand of the patient downward toward the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, attach something heavy to him, and the dislocation will return.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the reset is also done in another way: and this is to plant a long stick firmly in the ground, such that the head of it is as level with the pavement as possible; but not too thick nor too thin. Then place it under the patient, but ensure he has soft clothes underneath, and let the patient lie down along the length of the wood; then stretch out his hand downward on the other side properly, and the joint will quickly return to its place. And if it does not want to return despite all these things that we have said, do this treatment: take a stick of two spans in length and four fingers in width, which has a flat head for entering deeply under the armpit, as shown here:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	And then place cloths over the top of the stick so that it does not bruise the patient and place it underneath the socket of the affected shoulder. Then extend your arm over the stick and attach the sling to it and to the elbow of the hand, then place the arm on a rung of a ladder of the same width and let the hand hang downwards and allow the body to hang on the other side; the joint will return now
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is back in place, however it may be, then you must place underneath the socket a wool pad of equal size and then apply the plaster prepared with powder from the millstone, with incense and egg white all over the shoulder and around it, then press it firmly underneath the socket and twist the bandage on the plaster and tie the hand to its neck in this manner
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that they eat little, so that the member is comforted because it will heal more quickly. And then later after five or six days they should eat more and move around, and if it becomes firm again without becoming softened, then it is healed
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for another reason, then you must apply cauterizations at three points, as shown in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	"And if you do all this and after seven days the joint still does not stay in place, and he cannot raise his arm above his head, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set back in its proper place."
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"If a dislocation occurs toward the elbow, breasts, or behind, it is made by forceful movement and stretching of the hands, and another ligature must be administered; treat until it is healed."
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	"And if after healing there comes stiffness in the limb and delay in movement, then the patient should use it many times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original state."
de la dislocation dou coute	"of dislocation of the neck"
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	"Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated by force and returns by force; and if it is dislocated in all directions, especially front and back, and the dislocation has not been reduced, because one can see and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure."
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick limb with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is dislocated, it cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	"And it is necessary that you reduce it before any swelling occurs, for if swelling does occur, reduction will be difficult and perhaps not possible at all, especially when the dislocation is toward the back; this dislocation is worse than others and causes greater pain, and there may even be death."
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	"And the reduction is when it can be done so that you extend your patient's hand with both of yours; and let his arms be spread out, and place the joints of your hands on either side and above and below the neck, and press the joint into the patient's wrist or palm root until it returns to its proper place."
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	"And if the dislocation is toward the front, then it returns when you fold the hand onto itself and press firmly on the root of the palm where the neck is dislocated."
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, apply strong extension; and two assistants extend the arm, while another assistant holds it still during extension; then turn the arm on each side, having wrapped around a long and wide doubled cloth; and when the physician has joined the joint with their hand, they should anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint back into place until it returns; and once it is in place, apply a dry compress with egg yolk, press it firmly, and bind the arm to the patient's neck, leaving it on for several days before removing it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	"And if the joint is firmly fixed in its place, then untie the bandage and leave it alone. And if you see that the joint is not yet well set, then start again with the compress and the bandage, leaving them on for several more days until it is firmly in place. Then remove them."
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if the patient feels pain after the joint has been reset and it moves again, bathe and rub it gently, pressing until it is soothed. Then apply a poultice of grease from a mutton, leaving it on for one day and night before removing it, then place the limb in warm water; when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then reapply the poultice, then return to the bath. Repeat this process two or three times until the patient is healed; if necessary, apply a moist hot compress of fern with butter, pressing it on.
li dislocation de la main	Dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	"The dislocation of the hand is easy to reduce compared to other joints, but it must be done promptly as soon as it occurs before swelling sets in or heat comes."
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is such that you place the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and the doctor places it evenly, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it returns completely. Then you must look to see if it is in its proper place; then the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient places the back of their hand on the table, and the doctor puts his hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, then that's good. If not, then press with soothing plasters until it stops and leaves it thus without starting again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the joint remains twisted; but it does not harm the patient except that his hand is lame and he cannot grasp anything. Then know that the nerves are cut or the artery. There is no other remedy than cauterization nearby for this case.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	"And when the hand is in place, apply the compress that we have described, then bandage it and leave it for five days before removing it and leaving it alone."
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the hand cannot move properly and there is some pain, then apply hot water compresses and rub it until it is healed."
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of hand finger dislocations
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	The shoulder joint is dislocated equally on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the front; then the joint is pushed back into place with your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the joint and tilt it towards the side where it was dislocated; leave it thus for two days, then align it properly on the third day; and tie it up as we have said, releasing it on the fourth day and moving it, then tying it back up again; do this frequently until it becomes firm; and do likewise if it is dislocated at the front of the hand, doing as you did before until it is healed.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of dislocation of the shoulder blade bone__
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are many dislocations, there is no remedy, for the sick person dies quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign is that the patient cannot hold back his excretions voluntarily, and many times some limb is weakened, either both thighs or both arms or one; and many times the spine moves in four places; that which moves at the rear is called 'gilbositez': its treatment is that if gilbositez has come from childhood: then there is no cure nor healing for it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or percussion or similar things, the ancients have ways of treatment with grand words, but they are not always greatly beneficial; but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have made tools in various manners.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gibbosities which come to the chest before, none has health; and also that which comes directly on both sides, and one cannot cure except that which properly comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient be laid out evenly on his face, and have a restraint underneath him so he does not bruise himself; then place one stake at the head firmly in the ground, and another at the feet, and tie one rope under the buttocks of the patient, and another at the hips, knees, and ankles; and two ministers shall hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes; and they should be closed tightly, as we have said, and the doctor shall place his palms firmly on the spine until it yields.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a board of three arms in length, and place it below the skin, and let the patient lie on their side, and put the head of the board beneath the skin, then place the middle of the board upon the spine; and the physician puts his feet upon the other end of the board, and presses hard until it returns to its place; and if you see fit, do so with a turn that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you drive two stakes into the head of the patient's arm, one on each side towards the feet, with a span of space between each stake above and below; and there should be a hole in each stake where the turner corresponds, and the stakes should be firmly in the ground so they do not move; and between each pair of stakes there should be one turning stake upon which the turner lies, with two small stakes of a span in length for turning the turner; and then tie the rope that is between the stakes to the turner towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet at the other turner, and each minister turns his turner with all the ropes, and the master aligns the spine as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, then place a desiccating plaster with abundant egg, and then the dressings, and then the needle of a tablet of three fingers in length, that it may pierce the spot of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a linen bandage, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment until he is healed; and if any matter arises at the end of the healing, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines along with the needle that we have mentioned above; and sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; but this is the bone that appears, for which one should not be presumptuous: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	"Displacements of the hip joint
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	"Know that the hip joints and shoulder joints only suffer dislocations, unlike other joints which can also experience fractures. The hip joint is dislocated in four ways: inward and outward, forward and backward; but more commonly inward than outward or forward and backward."
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee opens more widely than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend his knee in the fire; and the place which is swollen with heat near the hip indicates this.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	"And the sign of one whose dislocation is outward is that these accidents are opposite to those mentioned before."
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	"And the sign of one whose dislocation is forward is that they can stretch their leg well enough; nevertheless, they cannot bend the knee without pain, and if they try to walk, they cannot do so without difficulty, and they may retain urine, and the angle may be swollen, and when they walk, they tend to limp on the heel."
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	"And the sign of one whose dislocation is backward is that they cannot extend or bend their knee, and their leg appears twisted compared to the other one, and the angle is softened, and the hip bone is located below the ribs."
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	"The treatment for this type of dislocation is to wait and see if the dislocation is old, and if it remains in its position without causing any harm, then there is no need for treatment, and one should not make assumptions about it."
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	"And for those whose dislocation is recent and of the four types mentioned earlier, one should quickly reposition the joint by pushing it inward and outward, and moving it to the right or left; hopefully it will return to its proper place, and no further treatment will be necessary."
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare the assistant strongly, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or tie it firmly above the knee; and another assistant extends his hand upwards in such a way that he places his hands below the buttocks, then pulls gently with a soft lien on the hip; and another holds the end of the lien; and all extend simultaneously up and down until the patient is lifted off the ground at once and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	"This method of traction is suitable for all four types of dislocation, and if the joint returns to its proper place, as we have said, then that is good."
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you must apply treatment according to its likeness. When the dislocation is at the hip joint, then you must raise the patient up on their sound side, then place the lien on the root of the hip and the spot below the angle, then pull the lien upwards towards the angle and the thigh; then another assistant takes his arms, embraces the large bone of the sick hip, and extends it strongly backwards: now it will return to its place. This method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot fasten it in the manner that we have described, then it is necessary to bind the two feet of the patient together with a soft strong rope across both heels and both knees, and let the limb of the sick person extend two fingers more than the other; then hang him from the top of a pole, and let there be two arms' length above the ground. Then command one minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and have another minister hanging with the patient, who embraces firmly the thigh, for now the joint returns hastily.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the back, then the patient lies down as we have said in the case of those with goitre, and tie the rope properly around the sick leg and also around the foot; then put two sticks, one at the head and one at the feet, and then stick one stick between the thighs of the patient in this way; and let there be many wet cloths around so that the patient does not blister. Then extend each minister towards him, and the physician puts his hand equally with the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, then put upon [the limb] a bandage, and press it as we have said in the case of pleurisy, and let the patient lie on the sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	"And when the dislocation is forward, quickly extend the affected leg as described earlier. Then place the surgeon's hand on the angle of the affected joint and press with the other hand while extending it downwards towards the knee."
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is to the front, then it is not necessary for the patient to extend downward or rise up from the ground; rather, he should be positioned as if his hip were dislocated to the front, as we have described concerning childbirth on two hips; and let him lie on his face, with the bandage extended as we have said before, and press upon the joint at the table; it will be ready when the patient extends his legs, and they are even. Then bring together the thighs, place the splint, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then untie it and replace the splint. And if you see that they are even, then bind them again as before and leave it on for three days. Then untie it and let the limb go gently until the member is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of knee dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The kneecap can dislocate in three ways: namely, inward and outward, and backward; it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the hip; if it does not fit with the hip, know that it is dislocated. And the reduction of all this is that you make the patient sit up straight and extend their leg as much as they can; place your back against their thigh and put their foot on yours; then take their knee in your palms and pull it between your thighs, then bend both sides of the knee strongly; and another assistant extends their foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it fits easily with the hip; then place the bandage on it, make the leg fit with the hip, and bind them together tightly for three or four days, then untie it; and do not let the patient walk until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, then extend it strongly, as we have said in the treatment of hip dislocation, until it is aligned.
de la dislocation dou talon	"About dislocation of the ankle"
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	"The ankle is sometimes sprained and sometimes fully dislocated both inside and out."
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and it appears bent at the part where it was dislocated; the reduction should be gentle, and one should gently extend the limb with one's hands when it is merely moved.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated entirely, then you should make the patient sit up straight, and have your assistants hold the leg firmly with both hands above the ankle; then pull the foot toward you with your right hand twice, then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and gently place the foot up high; and do this twice as described, pulling out and stretching the foot; if it returns, good; if not, start again because it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly plant a stick in the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around it so that the patient is not hurt; then an assistant should hold the thigh, and another assistant should stretch the foot with both hands or with a rope tied to the heel; then each assistant should pull evenly, and the stick should always be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient while stretching; then the doctor should gently reset the dislocation with their hands, and another assistant should hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is ready, then put the plaster and bandages on, press firmly, tie the foot to the leg, watch carefully the nerves that are behind the ankle joint, so that the binding is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, press it again; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before this time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"If inflammation sets in after the dislocation has been reduced, treat it as we described earlier until it is healed."
des dois	"about the toes"
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	"When the toes are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, and this is an easy task."
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the foot, then you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on two tables perfectly straight, and place your foot on what opens out from these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns to its original position; and when it is even and nothing opens up, then put under the sole of the foot a board with two legs, then press firmly and leave for three days, then untie him; and let him rest until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Concerning wounds and dislocations together:
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When injury comes with dislocation and you wish to restore it, many times the patient dies: therefore be not presumptuous in your care unless you are wise in the art and have long practiced it, and if you are compassionate and cautious, not hasty; and at first use things that soften heat, and leave the patient in God's hand if there is no hope of healing; but when there is hope, then set the limb in its place before the hot swelling comes; and when the limb is in place, then apply things that soften heat, and treat the wound with drying ointments as it should be done. But if bones are broken or small ones dislocated, then set them, and do as we have said for simple injuries. And guard against entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, for this will move you according to your Creator, and for the preservation of your armor and body.
Amen	Amen
