O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O thou, dearest son, I have completed this book which is the last of medical knowledge together with its fulfillment; and have brought it to an end by its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And there came unto me in vision that I should complete it for thee with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and has been entirely destroyed throughout, therefore its science has perished and been cut off; and there remains nothing but small descriptions about it in books which hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this ignorance and vanity have come, and intentions are closed and the science has been forgotten.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Now it seems to me that I wish to enliven it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And I will bring together the shapes of the iron tools for cauterization, and other instruments of this work with the arrangement of their declaration and preparation as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who engages in this must rise up in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he may know the judgment of the members and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and the movement and the moving and resting veins, and the place of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And therefore Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, but with a deed it is little.
et meismement en l’art de main.	And especially in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before should beware lest he fall into error and kill men.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Thus, I have seen many times those who meddle with this science and yet lack both knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut the abscess of scrofula on a woman’s neck, and he cut the arteries of her neck
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	So that so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And see also another physician who drew a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	and he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to him to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the greatness of the stone; and knew well that if it were cut into he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And see also another physician who took in charge the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking there was a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the physician, full of ignorance, tied the fracture upon the wound with strong bandages, and did not leave any lint to the wound, and thus left him.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	And he commanded that it should not be untied;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and so remained until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come unbind the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I had unbound it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all paths were already corrupted in the limb, and it could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And corruption did not cease to travel through the limb until the whole limb was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who burst open an inflamed carbuncle and then burned it through his own wickedness.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a carbuncle, when it is free from melancholic humor, ought not to be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, dear son, you must know that manual labor is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 namely, work where there is danger in many circumstances;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore, you must be careful so that foolish doctors cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	Take up your arms with caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, using the best method so that through God's grace you may come to safety and be praised;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave fearful diseases to those of great skill;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Remove your arms from that which causes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may pass from this world to the next with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galien says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not undertake serious illnesses lest you be called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	This treatise has been devised according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicinal ointments, from the head down to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and about the shapes of instruments, and iron implements for cauterizing, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, bloodletting cups, wounds, arrow extraction, and similar procedures.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and the chapter is organized with the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and twisted injuries, and similar conditions;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	It is organized from the head down to the feet, along with the shapes of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we remember the work, it is necessary for me to tell you about the quality of the temperament and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of a helper and the harm caused by them are lengthy discourse and subtle knowledge, including secret responses
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and about this most wise men spoke at length, and agreed upon it.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	They spared few words with me, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether they are hot or cold.
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	It means that it is to be known as: hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry complexion with matter together, some said that cautery there is great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cautery is of no use in diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat hot diseases with heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and he who says the opposite claims that cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases found in men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it many times through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any case, do not meddle with it except those who have tried it and know through long experience the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the seasons and the spacing of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	Of other constitutions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians assembled and agreed upon the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, my son, that fire alone is the secret of remedies and has greater efficacy than a cauterizing medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and acts only upon the member which it burns, and does not harm other members if one takes care.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The burning medicines spread from member to member, causing severe diseases;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And sometimes they kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire alone and its goodness do not harm unless there is excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, which was based on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	Therefore I excuse the length of my speech, as it is not my wish to conceal from you the secret that lies in fire and the quality of its work, how it overcomes bodily diseases, as philosophers demonstrate;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	So receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they agreed upon the time when cauteries should be performed and chose priests.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harm underneath is removed with the help of cautery;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And especially if cauterization is necessary for sharp and sudden pains that cannot wait until a greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear son, as foolish physicians do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for a disease healed by cautery has no recurrence;
et il le dient ensi;	They say thus:
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	But it is not so as they think, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion and dries up the humors that cause pain; their value lies more in their speed of action than in their power and virtue.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible for disease to come sometimes according to the patient's complexion, where the disease occurs and its strength;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things; except for cauteries administered where there is little excess or moisture, such as dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	But this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the surgeons of medicine, and that is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	But they do not believe that cauteries are worth using after medicine, but their intentions are mistaken, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer ways of treatments in any disease and they do not work, then we apply cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are gentler than those made of iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its high value.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	And they said that the place cauterized does not cause corruption, but this is not true, for I have tried it and found that in some people it is indeed so.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And cauteries of gold are worth more than those made of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And yet when you heat a tool made of gold, you cannot know for sure how hot it is just by its color, and it cools quickly;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	And if it is heated too much;
si font au feu;	If they put it in the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Thus, there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	Therefore, we use cauteries of iron that have been more appropriately prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have arranged this chapter from head to toe so that it is easier to find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moistness and coldness on the head. There are two types of it made due to the cause of an illness called "soda," and also because of many humors that flow down from the head to the ears and throat, causing numerous dreams, toothache, sore throat, and especially all illnesses that come from coldness like paralysis, sciatica, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The shape of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a softening solvent medicine for three or four nights, according to what the strength and age and habit of the patient can tolerate;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	And then make him sneeze.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, placing his hands on your shoulders;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And where your middle finger comes to, then press and heat the cautery called 'olivare', of which this is the shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	Place it on the marked spot, and move downwards and outwards, turning your hand bit by bit;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand gently, and reward yourself if you see a little of bone II emerging;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you do not see [the bone], then recommence the cautery until you see it as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	Then take some boiling water, and put soft cotton inside, and place on the location [of the wound], and let it stay for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	Then place soft cloth soaked in butter on top.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	And leave it on until the inflammation is gone.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmacon', until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And as the ancients say, the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges itself;
et por ce si aide mues.	And for this reason, nature aids wounds.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	Some also say that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burnt, and then scrape off what has been burned from the bone and heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that the cautery should be left on until it burns away bone as wide as a skein of wool used by women for spinning, so that the humors can exit more freely.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must leave the wound open for an extended period.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	After the wound, one must dress and heal it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two types of cauteries seem not to be entirely good except in certain men where there is a matter of fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	And it seems to me that I should leave them alone;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	For the head is weakened by prolonged solutions of nature, as we witness in other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, the first appearance of a cautery seems to me more harmful and dangerous; but I now use this one in common practice with safety.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	For chronic headache
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When the head suffers from chronic pain that lasts a long time, the patient should use ointments and pills called "cochies," and perform purgations of the head using oils and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	And even if one applies the cautery we mentioned earlier, it will not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Beware that if the head of the patient is strong by nature and not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Then cauterize with this cautery a little below what we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	Afterwards make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery at the place called 'vessels'.
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	And this is where cupping glasses are placed;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and lift your hand so that you do not see down to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels much greater pain from this cautery than from others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	And the cauteries on the horns must be more subtle than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	"Of the cautery of the head,"
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain comes in one part of the head, and the illness extends to the eye, and the head is purged with medicines that dissolve impurities, and all the other treatments I have mentioned in the section on illnesses are performed, but none of them help:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then he applies cauteries in two ways: that is, of medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cautery of medicine is such that you take an aloe stalk, remove the skin and chop it into two pieces, then place them on both temples where the pain resides in such a way that you can place the aloe stalk beneath the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it has been placed there, let it stay and hold it tightly for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	then remove it and wipe the aloe stalk with garlic, leaving the wound alone for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then place cotton soaked in butter on it until it sticks out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment with ointment until it is healthy;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that, then apply some burning medications that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medications.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery follows this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery with which is the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because its head is shaped like a keyhole with a slight curvature at the tip, and in the middle there is a small opening;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	And place it on the painful spot, keep your hand there and slightly twist the iron a little, until half of the edge of the heart-shaped knife is burnt.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	Then lift your hand so that the artery does not burn; this is necessary, and there should be an abundance of blood flowing.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterwards, place cotton wool soaked in sulfur on the spot for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then place cotton moistened with butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellare', do so at its tip, but be careful not to touch the artery in this young migraine.
de emigraine	de migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migraine as we have said before in the division of illnesses, and it does not improve, and you see that the previously mentioned cauteries of medicine and iron do not help, then you must heat the cautery called 'cultellare' until it is white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And hold steadfastly on the spot a line half as long as two fingers, and lift your hand once, ensuring that you do not compress the artery, and do not go up to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And guard against the mandible that moves when one chews, and ensure the nerve has no regard for the movement, and spasms do not come upon the patient, and guard against the loss of blood from the artery once it is compressed, or compression causes great fear, especially to those unskilled and inexperienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	And leave the work in mid-course;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it is relevant in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauteries are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize around the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see it, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And this cautery is better and more helpful than the one without.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Chapter 49: On the Pain of the Ears Due to Coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When cold pain comes to the ear and one has opened medicinal solutions there and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, but the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery called "point":
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	Then prick all around the painful ear, or both ears if pain is felt on both sides, and mark the spot a little away from the root of the ear where you will begin;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	And make ten pricks around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area until it is clean.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the Torture of the Mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	The torture that must be cured by cautery is only that which moves with the pulse flow, as we have mentioned in our discussion of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not perform cauteries on those that come from heat and dryness of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this type of torture that moves with the pulse flow and has been cleansed by hydrides and purgations of the head and gargling, but it is ineffective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	The one at the root of the ear, and the other a little behind the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	Place the cautery on the healthy appearing part, and perform cautery near the top of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another at the temple as long as a pea.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	And leave the cautery until half of the coal is burned.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	This is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it has a similar shape to the scalpel we have placed before, but it is slightly more refined, and the blade should be slightly thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the spot as I said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is advanced and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one where it is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And let him be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	de la litargie
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large ointments and pills made from mignonette for the head;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	Then wrap the patient's head entirely, and place on the back of his head the plaster of mustard that is described in the treatise on plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is the manner of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	Thus do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is healed thus, that is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if he is not healed, perform three cauteries on the sides of his head down to the neck, with two fingers' breadth between each cautery.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And treat him as before, and if you see that he does not improve, perform one cautery in the middle of his forehead;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if necessary, two more on the two temples, and treat until he is healed.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	And let the cautery called "olivary" be used, as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Pour traire la froideur du chef, il covient mettre li malaides en un lit bien chauffez et bien couverts, et doner lui un bains d’herbes chaudes, c’est à dire verveine et sauge et chouli ou chous vert; aprés doner lui yeres de graisse doree sur le chief, puis li met sus la teste ung emplaustre de canelle et de girofle en poudre mis en un lit dou pain; puis li fai .iij. cauteres emmi le chief comme j’ai dit devant.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and of those things we have mentioned before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After this, raise the patient's head, then make a cautery mark on the top of the head and on each horn, and two marks behind and three on the nape of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring, and the disease is severe, then make four cautery marks on the nape of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it burn until the most of the heart is cauterized, then raise your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the treatment, once it is healed, use the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not apply cauteries except for the phlegmatic type. First, cleanse the brain of hairs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and capable of taking medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot endure this, perform gargling and chewing to cleanse the brain often with good foods;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	Then raise the child's head in mid-air, and make one cautery mark according to what we have said before, one on the vessel, and one on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is strong and enduring, perform cauteries as I have said on those who have paralysis and weakness of body, on the spine of the back and neck, using an olive oil cautery according to the method that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, apply one subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is the presence of superfluities or corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then apply cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is that superfluities tend towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After binding the head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	Then make a bandage of well-made linen, like a circle, and place it around the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	And the patient sits crossed-legged, and is held firmly on all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	Then present the linen, melted with old sheep's butter;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	Heat it gently over fire until the dough can bear being placed upon it;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	Then remove the circle from inside the head, and let it cool;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this to the patient once each week with another good treatment until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you wish to cauterize a wound by making several pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery moistens the brain greatly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then place cotton soaked in butter and goose fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	For the treatment of eye pain
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When pain first comes to the eyes due to the signs that I have mentioned in the division, begin by giving the patient something to drink that cleanses the head and guards against all moistures. Make him sweat or take baths several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	Afterwards, instruct him to raise his head and make a cautery mark on the head. If both temples are affected by eye inflammation together or if only one temple is affected, apply two cauteries on the two temples or one cautery on the one affected temple.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cauterize all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, ensuring that the cautery mark is as long as it is wide.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And beware of excessive bleeding; if too much blood flows out, stop it with the power you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you about extracting arteries and how to incise and cauterize them.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And sometimes, one makes a cautery or incision below the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins or near the arteries that appear on the forehead from outside;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and it is seen that they are caused by cold humors, then perform the cautery mark I mentioned earlier for treating eye inflammation.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	For cautery on the head, apply two cauteries above both temples, and two cauteries behind below both cheekbones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if more is needed, cauterize bloodily above the eyebrow at each small cautery
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	When the aqueous humor descends inside the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat according to what we have said in the section on division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three nights of pigeon broth to drink
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After that, shave the head and apply a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And apply two cauteries called 'clavilis' above both eyebrows, slightly below the eyes
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	Be careful not to touch the artery
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	with which is the form
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see fit, apply two cauteries above both eyebrows as long as the eyebrows themselves
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not leave your hand there until a third of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have described
dou poil qui point l’oil	Regarding the hair that points at the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inward and prick the eye, in which case cauteries are applied in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	This is to know of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	Once they have grown and are even, then place the patient in your hands;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After placing a figure on the paper like the shape of a mirror on the mint, and let it be the beginning of the sign near the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then put moistened cotton on the eye with gum Arabic and powdered peppermint, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked several times gently, so that the skin is burned there;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the sign of health in this work is when you see the paper withdraw, and the hairs stand upright at the point of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then place cotton moistened in butter until the burning sensation is relieved.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if afterwards hairs come and the paper becomes soft then recommence the cautery on that same spot, just as you did first;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural place, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The medical fire cauteries are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make from parchment the shape of the laurel leaf;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take some French soap and live coals, each one-third part, and grind them well together;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then pour it onto the shape you have made like the laurel leaf, and place paper over the eyes;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the patient holds it with one eye only, then operate on one, and if both also.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	And place moistened cotton under the eye like a wick.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And place the patient's head in your lap with both hands over the medicine, and press the pouch until all of the medicine has been applied every time the patient feels biting pain, for they feel as if it were fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	After you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the biting pain has passed, then raise the lever up and observe if the paper lifts as if it were raised by force of fire or by incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	So if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, apply more medicine to the lever where the medicine did not act, until your work is even and your eyes are fixed.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place moistened cotton in butter until the heartburn has settled, afterwards treat the wound with ointment called 'diaphoresis' and others until it is clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to take great care with your work, so that no error occurs in administering medicine to the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the cautery on that spot softened by the paper itself, even as you have done before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment until it is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And this is the form of the mold for the mirror:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	Know that human eyes vary in size and smallness, and adjust your constraints accordingly.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And let not the straight path be blocked for him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Regarding the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you perform a cautery on it in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put their head in your hand;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	And the master should hold their head between his hands in such a way that it does not move nor bend its head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	Then put moistened cotton on egg white or in colchicum juice onto the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	Then heat the cautery that is thus shaped:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	And is raised at its end like the shape of a pigeon's feather, together with which the cautery should be;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	If you see it, let it be marked from one end to the other, and if you see it, let it also be like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	However, the one that is raised is useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula if it is open, remove the pus and dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	And if it is closed, open it, and draw out the bowels from behind
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	Then place a hot cautery on it and hold your hand on the cautery at the part near the nose above the eye, so that your hand does not become foolish.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And put the cautery into the fat of the eye, and burn it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you reach the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then repeat the cautery once more, and a third time if necessary, and leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	Then put moistened cotton in butter on it, and continue the dry ointment treatment until it is healed. If after forty days it is not healed, apply a corrosive medication until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	And the king according to what he would come to his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is one manner of fistulous cautery which some of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understands that it is a fistula, and opens its path;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Afterward puts into the opening a subtle thread of which this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	And they make it to the quantity of half a pennyweight.
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	Hold your hand firmly on the thread and do not move the patient's nose so that the molten lead does not run into his eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	And it is necessary to put onto the patient's eye moistened cotton in an egg shell or in a sieve:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The lead thus seals the path of the fistula and the sore heals miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have spoken of, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you must administer a puncture to the nose and return the fistula to its proper place within the nose.
des crevaices en levres	Regarding cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks appear on the lips which are called "cracks," and especially on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And quickly puts it into those cracks until it comes to the front;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterward, treat the wound with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the boil of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess appears at the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, afterward it becomes putrid and round and inflamed and becomes a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	And you treat it as we have said in sections, but it is of no benefit:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Then it is necessary that you apply a cautery according to the size of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After the cut or puncture of the fistula, hold your hand there until the iron becomes hot at its base and behind it;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this once or twice, after treating it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	If it is cured thus, that is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	And if not, then the site must be opened and the rotted bone removed, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	on toothache
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medications but this does not help, then place the patient's head in your lap;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After heating the cautery whose shape will be shown below, so that you can place it on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	And put hot irons quickly inside the cautery, and hold your hand there until the patient feels heat reaching the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	Then remove your hand and resume the cautery as you wish;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	Then the patient fills their mouth with salted water, holds it there for an hour, and rinses it out thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was loose is made firm again, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	on toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or dampness present, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, then cautery is needed in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	And cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cauterization with butter is done by taking cow's butter, and placing it on an iron or brass spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Then take cotton, wrap it around the tip of a tent stake, dip it in melted butter, and apply it quickly to the aching tooth. Hold it there until it cools.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And repeat this often until its effectiveness reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see that the wool and cotton become soaked in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth, and apply hot iron until the fire reaches the tip of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cautery with fire is thus made: Take an iron or brass tube, and make it thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, of which the form will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be relieved on that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, then remove it.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	Make the cautery according to the size that you desire and according to your ability;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	And this is the shape of the tube:
des scrophules	"of scrofulas"
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the boils are filled with phlegm and cold moisture, and do not yield to digestion by medications, then heat the hair cautery of which the form follows, and let it have two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	Place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, depending on how deep it is.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	If the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it on for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	And place moistened cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, treat it with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cautery:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moistures gather in the channels of the lungs, especially when it is due to a cold condition, then the patient should first be treated with dissolving medications.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	Then perform cautery at the root of the throat, taking care not to go all the way down to the throat and not to burn too much of the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	Then perform another cautery at the junction of the neck and the head of the spine, using the cautery called 'clavile', the shape of which is shown above.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heal the wound as we have said before until it is clean.
de la toust	de la toux
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all diseases of the lung are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or shortness of breath, and the disease is chronic, then apply two cauteries on the bladder in suitable places;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	And place another cautery between the two breasts.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	And let the cautery be of the type called "clavile," according to the form described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you wish, perform cautery by pricking with all of the cautery called "pointe," the form of which is described earlier in the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And let there be up to thirty points, or as many around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterward, heal the place according to what is said before, and let there be three rains of cautery according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are easier to perform, you should make three incisions at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	de la dislocation de l'épaule
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the arm bone is dislocated due to moist humors and is repositioned but keeps slipping back and becomes dislocated again even with slight movements, as we have experienced, it is necessary to first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Then have the patient lie on their back and side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	then lift the heart which is inside the titillate with the two fingers of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery that has two points until it is red hot.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	Burn the heart with a cautery until it pierces to the side, and bring together four cauteries at once.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	And for this reason, cauterize with the cautery that has three openings, so that there are six marks of cauterization.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	The nerves are as fine as a thread, and it is the shape of the cautery with three openings:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	"And sometimes it is attached above this one nerve, for which there are eight cauteries."
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	Next, apply powdered purslane seeds with honey;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, which happens rarely, then apply cautery on the thickness of the cautery clavile, or many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For once the joint is closed, and moisture removed, the patient is healed
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach causing it to lose its temperament, and there is an increase in phlegm that does not benefit from usual treatments, then the patient must be turned onto their back, extend their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Then apply three cauteries beneath the armpit of the arm on each side with the quantity of two digits, so that each cautery is like a key, and two cauteries outside the two sides so that the marks of the cauteries are at three angles, and have such space between them that they do not join together when they discharge pus.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And let the cauteries be so deep that they pierce both parts of the heart, and let the marks of the cauteries be in this shape without irregularity:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see a large cautery branding on the stomach in this manner;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and whoever fears this cautery should brand with a prick and press it onto the stomach once, according to the size that you see there.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with the entire cautery called "the point.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	**After the treatment of the cure that we had before, until it is healthy.**
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When pain in the liver comes from coldness, moisture, and excess windiness, so that its natural composition is impaired by excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help them, then the patient should be bled from their heel vein.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and apply three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity onto the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the rib of the man comes.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and keep a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of two fingers.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauteries be long and thin, and do not press your hand too hard onto all the cautery.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	And let only half of the cautery burn, and let the patient lie on their right side.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	And if he cannot do so, then he should lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms.
et c’est li forme:	And this is the method:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if it is your will, then cauterize these cauteries of the scalpel, if you are skilled and wise in the art, but beware that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry out the whole body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let it not come near to the belly, for the heart is very subtle there, and the liver knows for certain.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too strong.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it is in the membrane, he feels insane pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	Then when this treatment is undertaken by the physicians, the patient must be made to lie on his back.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then place on top of where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a branding iron; here is its shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery until the flesh is burned and bring it up to the skin so that all the pores are opened.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After treating according to the treatment of ulcers until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And only those who have studied at length in the art of medicine should use this cautery, and by whose hands these illnesses have often been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can boldly work, although it seems better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	"of the cautery for pleurisy"
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that for pleurisy one must make cauteries with the roots of aristolochia in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long root of aristolochia, as large as you can find, dry and also as thick and as long as your two fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	And soften it in oil and take it to the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the navel and the neck, and make two small cauteries a little way down towards the part below the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And place two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, sloping slightly downward.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And place one cautery in the breast, another above the stomach, one between the two shoulders, and two on either side of the breast, below the cautery between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	Press your hand not at all, but hold it gently, as when smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancients said that certain people used to use a fire cautery resembling a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the boil.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	When there is pain, as we have mentioned in the case of a liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	"of the mouse"
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the sections on treatments and it does not improve, then there are three methods of cauterization that are all beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of these, one method is to make three or four cauteries in a line following the length of the spine, according to the shape of the liver cautery we have described earlier.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	And do not press your hand throughout the entire cautery process, and let the patient lie constantly on their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	Another method of cautery is to heat the cautery that has two edges, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and raise the heart which is located at the middle, where the rib of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you raise the heart be according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	Afterwards, insert the two inflamed edges until the heart is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you wish, cauterize with all three edges of the cautery.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment has cast off corruption after a long time, it is better than the other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not useful for hydropics except in the manner called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help at all, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries around the neck, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the middle of the belly, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the chest;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	And let the cautery be placed close to the point of the spear.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	And then leave the cautery open for a long time to expel decay, and do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing will hasten, and both intentions will be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the keyhole that we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And that for the back be olive-shaped, as it is depicted herebefore.
de l’enfleure des piez	"of the swelling of the feet"
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet of someone with dropsy are swollen and full of yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go in too deep, otherwise you might spill out the yellow water, and the cautery should be made according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Then make two cauteries in each leg at the tip of the shinbone.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, on the calf.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	And leave the fire cauteries on for a long time without dressing them, until they close up.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the treatment of other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	"of pleurisy"
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When abdominal pain comes from coldness and moisture, to the point that the retaining and digestive virtue that is in the stomach and intestines is weakened, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	And if you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, then perform a large cautery on the stomach according to what was spoken of earlier regarding the cautery of the stomach, at the circular cautery.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And four subtle cauteries around the mouth of the belly like one subtle clavicle cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	"And if you see that there are abundant moistures and the patient is suffering greatly, then make a cautery on the point of the chest, one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach, for the treatment is profitable when there is good help."
de la cure des emorroydes	"of the treatment of hemorrhoids"
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old and made up of thick cold and moist corrupt humors, and have been treated with division as we have said without benefit, then perform cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	On the spine of the back, that which is entirely below the neck should be cauterized little by little in a triangular shape, and on both sides two cauteries should be applied underneath the jaw.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	And if you think that his stomach is cold, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the stomach one should apply one large cautery as it is said before, and another on the liver, and another on the navel with all four cauteries done at once.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery remain on for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, heal until it is whole again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the fleshy tissue called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut the head of an ulcer, first heat the cautery that resembles a razor and then place it burning hot onto the cut ulcer.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and hold your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, so that the blood may flow.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice; and if there is much ulceration, then cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	After applications of ointments benefit until they are clean;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the bladder, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure being cut or opened, which we will describe in its proper place, then comes such an illness that it can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If a fistula occurs and it is inflamed and poured out with rottenness and corrupted moistures, then probe it gently all the way through, ensuring that you know its full depth.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to how much of it has entered, and begin again with the cautery until the rotten and corrupt flesh is burned away once, twice, or three times depending on what is needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, be careful with these areas, and only perform this procedure in fatty flesh, thinking that it is not easily pierced.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	Then treat the area until it is clean; and if the area becomes dry, and the materials have been removed for a long time, then know that the area is entirely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the substances are not removed, know that the place is pierced, and the bone is broken at the front.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And thus as one of those things that we will mention in its proper place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and with great windiness, and she does not have her monthly period, then you must perform a cautery on her kidneys on both sides with the cautery called the "cautery clavile" that we mentioned earlier;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and they will provide greater help.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is weak and cold with moisture so that the patient retains urine, then perform two cauteries on the front part of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as a pea.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And perform one more cautery on the back if necessary;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the cautery iron be of the shape previously mentioned.
de la marris	Of the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception due to this, and the flowers are corrupted with their endings delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	And when they come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	Therefore it is necessary that three cauteries be made around the navel, as we have said concerning the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	And let the cautery iron be, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the beard
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When viscous humors descend to the box of the groin, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh appears longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and if the place of division is found empty, then you should cauterize the patient around the box of the groin with one cautery shaped like a circle, and cut in front of the place before the box turns, so that the box is inside the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	Therefore, let the cauteries used be like those employed to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these cauteries are not present, make three large olive oil cauteries, and let the cautery be as deep as all the hearts.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and continue until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the beard[TOOL_CALLS]Quant tu sentirás grant dolor en la boiste de ta hainche, si prent une plume de penne de galline et la met sus la boiste de ta hainche, et le meins que tu puedras souffrir; et quant tu auras ainsi soffert tant qu’il te puisse plaire, tu laisseras cheoir hors de ta boiste de hainche une gotte de ton sang. Adonques covient que tu fache .ij. cauteres environ la boiste de la hainche, si com nous avons dit ou cautere de la vessie.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain occurs in the hip joint due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated with what we have said in the section but the treatment is ineffective, and the condition is chronic:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then you must purge the patient of thick humors using foul-smelling pills or similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	Then apply a cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	The method for applying the cautery is in two ways:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	That is to say, using hot medicaments together with fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	There are many kinds of fire cauteries, one of which is:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	you should cauterize over the hip joint three triangular cauteries of this shape, with good depth and width, each having a space between them the size of two fingers, using olive oil.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	No cautionery should be applied midway upon the head of the hair shaft; thus there are four such cauteries according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see it, cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned earlier in the case of hair dislocation.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But do so in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire hair shaft, and all the hairs are burnt around the root.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when pain holds in the neck and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it extends to the thigh and leg, apply two cauteries where the patient feels pain, and one cautery above the ankle four digits on the left side.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And let the cautery be of the type that cuts into the hair shaft; and let the thickness of the hair be burnt.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two digits from the foot or near it, cauterize where they feel pain with three or four points using the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	If necessary, apply more cauteries.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then let him perform a cautery with a cutellar or circular cautery, and make sure in all your cauteries that you do not let the cautery burn too much so that you harm the nerves and large arteries, and cause greater injury to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg became entirely swollen, and also the foot, and it was pierced and rotted all over.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a bellyache from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, make cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise say in the cautery of the hip, concerning which is this manner: make such iron and let it be at its head as thick as a hazelnut, or somewhat less, and let it be perforated and let there be between each perforation a space equal to the thickness of a barleycorn.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the perforations be two parts open, and let them be like nuts, and there should be one made of good iron;
et c’est li forme:	And this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is entirely red-hot and glowing, then place it on the hip bone of the sick patient, and turn it towards the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	And the cautery once applied, let it remain for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	Then make an embrocation of butter and leave the wound open for a long time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasis says that we rarely use this cautery due to fear of its heat, and few use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Yet it is one of the good cauteries for those who can endure it, and where it strikes.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The burning cautery is made thus: Take an instrument with teeth in which the edges of the door descend, and it should be of bronze or iron on one side long, and at the top there are two nuts, each having between them the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and they are opened wide and above, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After placing the box of hot coals next to the patient lying on their healthy side, then press your hand strongly onto the box of coals;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing it between the two circles of hot water heated with one handful of earth, leave for an hour's time, and let the patient endure the heat and burning sensation.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For he finds there a biting like that of fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the biting sensation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water, leaving it thus for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the burn is gone;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	And leave it for three more days until putrefaction ensues;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this would be the final aid after treatments with ointments, as long as it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make another poultice like you did for the groin area.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And this is how hot water poultices are used, and I have written it here in treating medicinal remedies.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and live coal, as much of one as of the other, grind them together, and place them in nine pots.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	If there is a small opening where even the point of a razor can enter.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	And place another pot underneath, well-plombed, and put on it alkali and hot water and sweet oil until there are two layers of powders that you can grasp firmly in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Then let it remain thus until water and sediment descend into the lead pot, then take all that water, and pour it onto hot alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be very thin and usable in many medical works and cauteries for other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs the same work as fire, and has other medicines with which one can cauterize well the hair, such as tassel and honey of cardamom and hot water with soap, all mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galen tells us of a treatment whereby a man was cured of sciatic nerve and hip pain, greatly praised it, saying no other treatment was performed, and that he was healed immediately upon doing this, and afterwards bathed as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And do in such a way that you take fresh and dry green verdigris, grind it much with a handful of fat, and put it on the hair and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and let it stand.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	Let it remain for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter a bath until his body is slightly warm, and lay him in bed, and the pain will all depart and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a cautery with such medicine unless it is after an evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat bile, it helps greatly;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And this should be done in such a manner:
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen, soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow between the thumb of the foot and the one called "foscile".
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	Afterwards, take dried goat bile and burn it to coals over fire. Then place the bellows on the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished;
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And do this again in the same way, continuing thus until you believe that it has reached the hairline and the pain has ceased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this type of cautery is called 'goat cautery'.
de la dolor dou dos	for the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from percussion or from too great an evacuation or from similar symptoms of spread-out cold matter, none of these symptoms warrant cauteries except that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is then necessary to make the patient void themselves of fetid pills or similar ones. Then perform three rows of cauteries marked with incisions on their back where the pain is felt, with five cauteries in each row or more depending on the strength and amount that the patient can withstand;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And the cautery shall be performed according to the cautery called 'poins'.
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	If you see, make three or four cauteries on the middle of the shoulder blade in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Often this illness affects young children, and its initial sign is that they have difficulty breathing when they stand up, with fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	And you will find in the lower back of the spine, and our appearance appears above other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize with the cautery of the navel according to this shape:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that each part of the spine receives the cautery evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish to do so, cauterize around the spine with points two or three lines apart, keeping them close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Then heal the wound until it is clean according to what we have said, and be sure not to apply cautery to any gibbosity near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	for the pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pains of the joints are due to moistures that spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet which physicians properly call 'podagry,' and when it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is treated with cauteries in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make many cauteries around the ankle joint, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need for you to press on the face of the foot, perform cauterization at that location called 'point'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains extend to the knees and other joints, which often happens, then make three or four cauteries on each knee cap, all olive-shaped.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand outside so long that the blade of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if pains are in the hands, make two punctures around the fistule.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains no pain in the toes, then make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if pains come up to the hips or shoulders, cauterize each part and make good care for the patient and give medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	Because if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he shall be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the nose
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When rupture occurs in the groin, and the bowels descend to the thighs and it is recently happened, then when you see to cure him, he should not eat that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and he should use things that leave the belly, so that the wind descends from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	then make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the bowels are replaced, and tie them with your two fingers, and press firmly below the rupture onto the bone of the wrist, and there is one sign that is like half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat the cautery of which this is the shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it becomes white and casts seeds
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bowels to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the attendants shall hold his hand so that they do not return backwards.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	Open the patient's thighs widely and place a cushion beneath him, then one servant on each thigh and another on the stomach to hold his arms.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand and hold it there with your right hand until you reach the bone; if you do not reach the bone the first time, then repeat it again until you do so.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	And be careful that the bowel does not spill out while performing the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	That you may not burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	And so that the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	The cauteries for children should be thin according to their bone size, and those for large people should also be large according to their size.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days, treat the cautery wound with butter until the burning sensation is gone;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After other dressings are applied until it is healed, let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is fully healed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and his bindings must be left loose for a long time so that his eyes do not bulge when he tries to go to bed at night.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and apply it for another forty days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let him have good rest, working little and guarding against excessive drinking and eating, and raising his voice too high;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall tell afterward the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	"Of the rupture of the abdomen"
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ruptures come in other bellies and are visible, and you see that they do not grow any further, apply the cautery with a hot iron according to its size, and burn the third part of it near the heart.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a hot iron at three angles in this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the entrance point and draw a line along the width above the rupture, and another below it, and hold your hand within throughout the fire cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	"Of old pain in some limb"
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, either from falling or striking, and this pain persists for a long time, despite medical treatments being ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cautery should be done according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, its strength and virtue, and its location regarding twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If he is without pain from the first cautery, that is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If this name does not improve, recommence another cautery upon it, for such is the custom that it should be changed in the member that lies nearby; therefore you must make the cauteries until the patient is cured.
de meselerie	Of dislocations
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Wounds are often greatly helped by cautery with great benefit, especially those that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	If you can cauterize the wound, be careful if the disease is at the beginning; and if it does not heal according to what we have said in the division, and neither swells nor stays, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on top of it:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	One at the nape, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	And two on each horn [of the eyebrow], and one behind on the small lock of hair at the back
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	And leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the fumes of the thick humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	And cauterize the mouse according to what is written before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the blackhead is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it clearly harms, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned above: one at the head, and one near the neck, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the chest and another nearby, and two on the two shoulders.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the arms, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	And beware of the nerves that are behind the heel bone, so you do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and sometimes one makes a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more cauteries you perform, the more help you give, and the greater the benefit.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries are large and small according to the limbs and joints as you will find them in the methods of iron tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After applying flour of wheat with honey, and other treatments until it is clean.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medications, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then apply cauteries to the limb according to its size.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cautery be a little deep into the flesh of the heart;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with oils until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes cautery is performed on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the swelling has been removed;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And nonetheless let no one meddle with it unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	of white spots
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is established and medical treatment does not work, then cauterize it with a slightly deep cautery according to the thickness of the heart's flesh until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then follows the treatment with fine flour of vetches and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and pigeon blood and eagle blood, each one part.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And all should be mixed together, tied up in a cloth, and applied to the place until it is hot.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre begins and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	Moreover, wise men said that one should also apply cautery to the center of the cancer.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	But I do not think this is good either, for I fear that it might become ulcerated and corrupted, as I have seen it happen before.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And the more appropriate thing is to cauterize around it with a cautery called 'circular', as we have mentioned in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it is delayed in dying either due to the excess it produces or due to the weakness of the patient when they are elderly (that is too old), and they have little blood, or due to the season;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	And you must hurry to die.
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	Then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, pricking [the area].
aprés le laisse ensi.	Leave it like that afterward.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten its death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced all through the cautery, then heat the cautery which is shaped like this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that illness called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the heart, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them so deeply that the course of the corruption is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After its treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another condition called "corrodens" exists, which is nothing but a rotting of limb, for it consumes limbs as fire does dry logs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this illness in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries, small and large according to what is needed for the location where the illness is.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	Then cauterize all around until you remove all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is destroyed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it rest for three days, and apply a poultice with oil on the cauterized places until the burns of the fire are gone, and all corruption is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After treatment with ointments producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days no healthy flesh appears, then it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	But if not, then begin the cautery again on what remains of the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this manner has sometimes been cured by medicine alone instead of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	But nevertheless, fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already discussed the cure of medicine in the section on division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the moles that come upon the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often, a disease called "clos" in our language arises at the feet, and it is a large broken thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery should be heated like a bellows iron and made of good iron to fit the size that can grasp the nail on all sides, with sharp edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After placing it hot onto the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the head of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	And leave it like that for 3 days until it begins to exude pus.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the joint with ointment made from flesh until it is clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are turned away from the body, which often happens in hands and feet, then you must bring a cautery of hot water.
et est en teil maniere:	And it is done in this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a clay pipe or an iron rod, or a bellows iron, and place it on the nail and the surrounding flesh, that is to say for warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And place the cane above so that it encircles all around, then put a bit of hot water there, and hold your hand firmly, pressing your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and finds the deep warm water pathway to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	And let the patient endure a little the biting of the hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then leave it thus, and it will uproot itself entirely with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus one does after another, until you remove all those on the body, then treat them with oils that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	"the treatment for trembling"
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When someone trembles with cold from the nerves, or from quartan fever or another, then you must perform four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine;
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	And one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	So it will stop trembling, and the warmth of health will return from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	"putrid pustules"
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never do sores appear on the body's surface or pus-filled pimples, which come from corrupted thick matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	If you see that pustules are appearing at first, then you must perform a cautery on each head;
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A subtle cautery of myrtle wood, whose tip is heated in fire, or of long aristolochia root, or the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when it appears in this manner, and it cannot grow afterward from there, but the excess from which it comes is broken off, and it becomes clean.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	But it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	"When the artery is severed"
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Often there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes behind, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	And it is very difficult to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, quickly place your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and press hard until the blood is appeased under your fingers and no more drops come out;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then place on fire olive oil cauteries of various sizes, small and large, until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then take one [cautery], either large or small according to the wound and where the artery is routed, and place it on the vein where you hold your two fingers, holding the cautery until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is spent, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease doing this one after another until the blood is stanched.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And be sure that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be easily stopped, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	Either by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by tying tightly with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to stop bleeding.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And let it be bound and restrained properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	And those who bring about stopping of bleeding by tying very tightly with cloths or putting hot things on top, or other similar things, do little good if any at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a physician or medication nearby, then he should place his index finger on the vein wound as we have said, and press firmly until it becomes reddened above the wound and the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move his finger but moisten it with cold water often enough that it becomes very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And make haste to provide what is needed for cauteries and medications.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the surgeries for slashing wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which a fire cautery or hot medicine is needed, and the cauteries used for them and their causes, tools, and forms.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	I have placed this chapter on cauteries from head to foot, and in this chapter I will follow the same path so that one may more easily find what one seeks.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And before I begin this chapter, dear friend, you should know that there is more danger and fear in this chapter on cauteries than in the first one, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the practice of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, incising an abscess, treating wounds, extracting arrows, cutting into stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	Where there is doubt and fear, many people die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt anything foolish.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come seeking treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	Such cases often involve those who harm themselves so much with their illness that they die easily due to the insanity that results from their condition and the severity of their illness.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	One should fear these things.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And there are those who lose their senses and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am cured.
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	Do not agree with those who come to you in this manner, but place greater value on your honor than on your desire. Open yourself wisely and carefully to those whom you are sure of and whose praise you can earn.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	Use prediction and indication in treating your patients, so that health may be restored
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	This will help you gain good reputation, glory, and the memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	"Dear child, Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if it pleases Him to inspire you with His holy breath, Amen."
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	"Or I have arranged this chapter for you by chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries which I have already arranged from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need."
dou chief plein d’aigue	"A full head of water"
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this illness often occurs in newborn infants when the birth canal squeezes the child's head too tightly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And sometimes this happens due to a hidden cause which one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and it always leads to death in those that I have seen.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	Therefore, it seems to me that I should leave off working on such cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and it swelled each day so that he could no longer support it.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	And the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture gathered under the bone over the sphenoid, between the heart and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	And if this moisture is between the heart and the bone, and if the abscess is small, then make a wide incision in the middle of the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture runs out.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And here follows the form of the spathula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	"If the moisture has grown more and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:"
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see these signs: the corners of the head raised on each side, water shoots out when pressed with your hand from within, but nothing comes forth in response:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If you must cut around the head three cuts in this manner
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	After the incision, remove all moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After stretching the wounds with bandages and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then untie it, and treat the wound with dressings and poultices, leaving the head bound evenly; then give the patient dry food without moisture until the limb is healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another manner of incision is to look where the boil opens and where its point meets;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for sometimes it is in front
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes behind
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes on the right
et aucune fois en senestre.	and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Therefore cut where the boil opens and where the water collects, cutting along its length according to your ability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be sure not to touch the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	for if you damage an artery or vein, the patient may die from blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	"of boils"
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a person contracts an illness called "cataract" in the eyes or the foot, and if that illness is chronic, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization with two arteries being tied off.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is therefore necessary, when you bandage his eyes, that the patient turn his head back.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	After rubbing the spot with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then twist the patient's neck with the entire cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein lies, and its ends are located behind the ears; few are covered.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the spots with ink, then cut both with a sharp spathula at two parts until the vein is cut to the bone, and this should be done on the wide part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see one artery, insert the spatula underneath it and cut it from above at two points across its width.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	Once the vein is cut, blood will flow out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not appear upon feeling, then you must measure the distance of three fingers' width, then mark with ink and cut until it reaches the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And approximately six drops of blood should be let out; sometimes a little more or less depending on what the patient can bear and the fullness of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains on the bone tip of the hipbone, so cut that no abscess may come into it; then press the wound and bind it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	"de emigrainne" translates to "of migraine".
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an ancient migraine comes on, accompanied by catarrh and severe headache with moist eyes, heat in the temples, and other such disturbances which do not improve with medical treatment, then it is necessary to tie off the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient should shave the hairs from his temples and listen to the artery which opens in the temple; for it beats plainly there, but it has little response outside except in some men who are very cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is responsive, then the patient should bind his neck with some cloths; then rub the place with some rough cloth, and apply warm water to that place until the artery appears plainly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula of which this is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then gently strip the skin until you reach the artery; then raise it with pincers and carefully separate it from the tissues that are beneath each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is thin, then twist it with the point of a nail file, then cut off that part according to the amount of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not cut, the blood will not flow entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And remove six finger widths of blood.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread, so that decay does not come before the wound is sealed, and blood flows freely.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut off the excess between the two ties at that same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a cautery knife up to the bone until the head is cut.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is the second operation, if the patient has no fever and is of warm temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For a cautery helps to finish off moistures:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Therefore it is especially helpful for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Wherefore, for the extraction of arrows, one must fill the wound with plenty of cotton and place well-made tampons on top;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are dislocated, let them be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and dressings, until they are healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the artery breaks during your operation, hurry to cover it with a cautery, or use the place of quicklime and press with your hand until the blood is stopped.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you do not have this available, place your thumb on the spot until the blood is frozen, then rinse the area with cold water until the bleeding stops, and bind it as necessary.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And in extracting the artery, it is easier and quicker to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but let the cuts be well spaced to retain their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it retains its heat less well.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there should be one thick spacer between the two blades, and then when you have marked the two spots with the red-hot iron, cauterize the vein in two places down to the bone.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And let them be removed between the two heads for it is not entirely suitable to this cautery.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins above the forehead, and medicine applied there is ineffective, and you see the face redden, and feel trembling on the brow like shivering;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	And if the eyes are thin and moist so that the hairs of the eyelashes fall out, and the eyelids are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called this treatment 'cure contuse' and it is to be done thus: behind the forehead of the patient who has this illness, let him have hairs there, then make three incisions equally along the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	And let one of the incisions be just like two fingers' width throughout the forehead sloping downwards until near the nose, and the other two on either side above the eyelids, but guard against cutting into the arteries that are on either side above the eyelids;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And keep your hand away from the connection of the two lower jaws, let each cut be the size of three hairs wide.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have ready a sponge and many bandages to wipe away the blood; then insert the forceps at two points, of which this is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	From the incision that starts at the temple up to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And strip away all the skin that is between the two incisions up to the soft tissue on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this forceps.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then insert into the first incision the instrument called "the curette", which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other. Here is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp knife towards the flesh near the heart, and the blunt knife towards the bone, and cut until it reaches the middle groove.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to those that open from the heart, then make another cut in the middle incision up to the other end.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	Then drain the blood evenly and press the wound to stop the bleeding;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then place in each incision a wick of old cotton, and put on moist bandages soaked in wine, oil, and honey, ensuring that no abscesses form.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the third day untie the linen, and bring great plenty of cold water, then apply the plaster of balsam with rose oil, and other treatments to heal wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	"of the eyes"
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	If catarrh comes frequently, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weakens sight, and burns the membranes;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and deep in the head there is burning pain, and the patient sneezes
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then know by these signs that those matters and that catarrh come from many veins, and the proper treatment for it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should command the patient to lie down on their back, then make a long incision along the forehead and another across it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin at the opening of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be made down to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves that move in chewing
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	And when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then open between the two lips of the wound and put in old cotton, and linen strips.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then tie upon cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscesses.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that cause the flesh to adhere.
En teil maniere:	In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony; make a plaster from them
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and apply this plaster to these wounds to cause flesh to adhere all around.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of earplugs
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls into ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 either grain, or beast, or stone from a mine, or similar thing like iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing things like water and juices and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When something like a stone or other thing falls into the ear which does not fit well nor grow in the ear, place the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, then distill some drops of violet oil or sesame oil, and apply it for extraction
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and when the stone is expelled by sneezing, hold the nostrils closed during sneezing, and wrap around the ear cloths or wool.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	And they attach the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times fire comes from this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come out by fire, let him bring about extraction with subtle tweezers, of which here is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it jumps out with the tweezers, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	But if not, then bring about extraction with a small, subtle hook;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if it does not come out with that, then make a small copper tube and thrust the end of the tube into the hole of the ear strongly, and stop up what is around the tube with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the tube;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then draw fire strongly through it, for often does fire come thus as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it does not come out by fire in this manner, then take pitch with which they catch birds, and put some of it on an instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and place a bit of cotton around it;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the buttock over the stone or whatever it may be, and draw fire.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not jump out from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear before the abscess becomes hot and spasm occurs.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the manner of cutting is as follows: first, make the patient lie on their back, and draw out blood according to the measure of their strength; then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where it depends on fat.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	And let the cut be like a half-moon until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability and suck it out quickly into your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and continue treating him until he is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is gravel that is inside and it swells, then administer an extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin, subtle spatula according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that boil.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then extract it with tweezers or forceps gently and carefully, as we have said, so that the extraction is smooth.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, in the water that falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing movements first, and plug the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out from there, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, then take many thin, light pins according to the length of your thumb and heat them a little over the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and have the patient insert one or two of these pins into a perforation in their ear, with one end sticking out on the other side, and then place another pin on top of the one inside the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and continue doing this from pin to pin until all the water has come out, and thus it will all flow out.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you see this, then take a reed, insert one end into the ear, and heat the other end with fire until the inner part of the reed is burned.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then repeat this process with other reeds until all the water has come out, as we have said in the case of pins.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In extracting a creature, if it is small-bodied, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the section on division.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	But if it is large-bodied so that one can feel it, then arrange an extraction using forceps;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and this is the easiest thing to remove that might be in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In extracting roundworms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on division and dealing with distillations, and if the treatment does not help, then you must examine the ear in sunlight
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if no worms are visible, use delicate forceps to extract them; if they still cannot be seen, then use the instrument whose shape is shown here
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the most subtle end of the instrument into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck strongly along the entire length of it
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Repeat this often until all the worms emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey and come out, then plug around the instrument with cotton as I have said regarding stones;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not leap out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them in treatises on distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, here is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	It should be made of silver or thin brass below for the small holes, and above for distilling.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And for pressing inside the distillation, make sure the instrument is well-made of brass, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around its point carefully.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then pour your oil or juice into the tube, along with any of your medicines you wish in the ear, and place the tube in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then insert the razor with all the cotton inside, and press gently with your hand until the oil has been distilled into the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And let the patient feel it inside; and let the distillation be in a small pot warmed over the fire before it is distilled into the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And ensure that [the cautery iron] is not too cold, for then the remedy would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of earplugs
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without any holes in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and the same happens to people due to blockage of wounds or tissue born within the ear, and these blockages sometimes go deep into the ear so they cannot be seen;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And sometimes there is no hole, yet it can still be seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	So then, if the blockage is deep and cannot be seen, it is difficult to treat in many cases; but if one can see it, then place the ear of the patient towards the sun;
et regarde dedens:	And look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If you see the operation clearly defined, then perform this procedure according to the form written below:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind, so that it does not wound the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the blockage is of flesh or bone within the ear, then hold it with fine forceps and cut gently until all that flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the eruptions are deep in the ear, then take a sharp, light razor and heat it slightly on the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you sense the obstruction that causes the patient to feel pain upon hearing, pierce it easily and ensure you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then place in the ear a wick according to the width of the piercing, and soak it in Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this for several days until the wound is healed; then take a wick and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered tartar on it.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see that the ear is swollen, then you must remove the wick and replace it with another wick soaked in rose oil cerate until the swelling is gone.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue treating it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	"And if bleeding begins to flow, then dip a sponge and wring it out in cold water, and place it on the ear. Use other remedies that stop bleeding which are found in treatises on distillation."
de la char des papieres	"de la chair des papieres"
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	These membranes that come from the eyes when they are moist and dry should be stretched out with forceps and tweezers, and cut off at their base with a scalpel.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then sprinkle powdered tartar on the wound.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if you find blood on the skin, then cauterize it with a small circular cautery iron, and afterwards cut around the incision.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and often they return, unless something remains at their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times there come forth from the eyes certain things that resemble hail in their shape and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called 'hail', which is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The workings are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Be aware if the hail moves from one side to the other, and this is easy to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Then make an incision on the large side, gently scrape each part with a scalpel, then grasp it with forceps and cut it off.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cut it off without piercing the paper somewhat, it does not matter to the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the wound is large, join it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If it is small, do not exert force, for gentle treatment will restore it quickly and form scar tissue.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the hailstone descends into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, grasp the hailstone with tweezers, and gently press it from both sides;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is moved away by the incision, that does not matter.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And once the hailstone has been removed, rinse the ear with saltwater, and treat the site where scar tissue formed until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	de la graisse des eulz
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a fatty substance that becomes trapped in the webs of paper tissues above, which happens more often in children than adults. It causes great discomfort to their eyes and they experience watery discharge in the mornings, unable to look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And therefore they often lie on their faces and sleep like that, with their papers wet under their eyebrows, causing swelling and inflammation to cover the exit pupil which opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your thumbs on both sides and feel the exit point between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of working is this: The patient should place his head on your hand;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	Then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the exit pupil from each part, then place it on top;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	And press with your two thumbs, one on either side, so that the exit pupil is gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	Then make a cut through the middle of the moisture with a sharp scalpel blade, creating a slit no wider than the wound made when letting blood from a vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	And cut deeply into the skin until you reach the exit pupil;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And in many cases, the exit pupil comes out of the slit in the form of a white piece of fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Remove then, with one piece of soft linen between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Ensure that you do not insert into the crevice; watch so that all the spatula reaches up to the eye without injuring it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the exit is not at the beginning of the crevice, then slightly widen the crevice lightly until it appears.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then remove it as we have said, then moisten rags in warm and cold water and place them on the location, and apply compresses.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are men who crush mustard seeds and place them atop to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healthy again.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms in a hot location, then treat it with soothing plaster until it heals.
des poilz des papieres	Of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow on the eyelids that are not natural and become entangled, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases such as habitual tearing and softening of the eyelids, leading to the destruction of the eyes;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And there are four methods of treatment:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	Either by cauterization with fire together, or by warm medicine as stated earlier in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by tweezers, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary for you to place the head of the patient in your hand, then twist the paper from the eye towards your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it is turned over, that's good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then insert a needle along the entire thread.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and this should be done near the edge of the paper where the hairs grow around these hairs, and draw the thread upwards along the entire paper, then twist it towards the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then cut below the paper, below the hairs attached, along the entire blade edge, from the large corner to the small one;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and place underneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth, then press upon the paper with an iron, like a mint leaf, making sure that the pressure is according to the amount you see lifting the paper which has been cut.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if there is need to cut off a large quantity of the paper according to how moistened it is;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then make all of the spatula according to the two lines you have marked, beginning from the large handle down to the small one.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And let it be one of the slits near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root; then place the unicorn horn at one of the two corners of the heart, and scrape all over.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then bring the two lips together with a stitch of fine thread made from wool, and wipe away the blood; and harden the surplus threads over both eyebrows with any sticky substance you have if you wish to do this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if not, pay no heed to it; then leave the stitch and threads for three or four days
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then heal the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, for paper weakens the healing of the wound and its union, but stitching is harmful (as the ancients say), and this is done without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	And there is another manner:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	It should be that you draw on the paper a figure like the leaf of a myrtle, as we have explained, with three incisions according to the form shown below:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	"Then cut those that exceed the small forces evenly according to the shape shown here."
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you are unable to hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread attached and insert it into the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	And place the second thread next to the large bell, and the third thread next to the small one, and bring together between your two fingers evenly.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift your hand evenly, and raise all the skin where you have drawn, as we have explained, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it until it is sound.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if an abscess forms at your incision, then soothe it with wax and similar softening ointments;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	Sometimes the hairs of the paper are reversed:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	If you must use what we have said about incision.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	But stitching is more artful on one side than the other.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of sinews follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	And take the paper and fold it inside according to what I have said, then make two sinews artificially, and two fine threads as long as the paper and as wide as the span.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	And cut off two heads of two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	Then bring together both subtly over what is above the paper oil, and tie the two sinews of the two parts firmly;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	And leave it thus for a few days, and the skin that is tied will die, shrivel, and become porous until it falls off.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it takes too long, cut it with forceps, then treat it until it is healthy;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is healed, and the paper has been removed, the hairs will no longer grow.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the two cakes which you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity in length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The operation is such that you take a thin needle, and through it pass one thread of soft and fine silk;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then join the heads and tie them both carefully, with the length of the threads being a palm's length;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then pass another thread of silk through it briefly, tying the ends of the thread;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	The patient then places their head in your hand;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And be near the sun so that the operation is clear, for it is a subtle and small operation. Then insert the needle along the entire length of the hair root, piercing it quickly through the skin until you draw it out naturally from above the hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull out the hair up to the point where it entered, and pass that hair through the needle if there is one or two or three or more;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then pull your hand out so that all the hairs come out with the paper along with their natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the wick has been treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the wick from underneath until all the thread you have wound comes out, so that the wick comes out through the hole above and you can see it by the sight of your eye.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then pull out the wick and thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hairs return to their place and flesh grows over them.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are short, then accompany them with one long hair from your head and let it be lifted with it until it becomes elongated, and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	"About the rottenness of the eye"
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called "aleacrati" or corruption occurs in the eye, there are two ways to treat it:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One is natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cut, or burn, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of the work is this: You should cut through that joint, separate its lips, and insert linen wicks. Then bind it until it heals.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And you must not use things that dry and constrict in treating it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the illness will return worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	But apply softening things, such as fenugreek.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And rosewater or alembic and linseed oil boiled, and diacylglycerol melted in some of the oils, wrapped in a linen cloth, for this is the treatment.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the essence of your treatment is to ensure that it does not heal in its former shape;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And these procedures we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of flesh that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is underneath is truly called 'axacrati', and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	Accidents happen from wounds and cuts and burns and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the way of the operation in this case is that you take a needle with doubled thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pierce from the left eyelid as far as the right one, so that the threads come out on both sides of the flesh.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then stretch the flesh above along the whole needle, and cut it with a wide spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the figure on the paper returns as it should, that is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, then take a razor and place it in the slit, turn the paper, and make two slits on each side within the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and the openings of the two slits should be at the two corners of the incision you have cut, and one angle should be made so that when they are joined together, the figure is like the figure of a letter called 'I Greek'.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then remove that flesh according to the size of its sides and bottom from what is beneath the paper, then join the two separated parts together and sew them with a wool thread;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat those we have mentioned with softening medicines, and use tents until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitching or cauterization, then you must make an incision full of pus beneath the hairs of the pubic region, and according to what is written above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then place between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the procedure according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise master prepares everything with all his power so that the form returns to its natural shape
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patient himself, according to what is needed in each procedure and tools for various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this injury happens to many men in such a way that the skin above is stuck with the whites of the egg, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must put the tip of a razor underneath the skin and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And they apply it like pincers, until you grasp what is ready at the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer if the spatula is too sharp and blinds the eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And let your incision be light, from which you strip away that gathering, so that the skin returns to its natural form;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and all of that gathering is healed, and sometimes they put salted water in the eye, and rinse it with fresh water, and with collyrium;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place a linen tent between the skin and the eye, and put wool moistened in egg white over the eye;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day, apply cold compresses and ointments until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that a nail is in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	either it is nerve-like and similar to hard skin, or another kind that is not nervous but resembles moist white congealed blood, which when touched by iron and grasped with pincers cannot be seized.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	And both kinds of it start near the large eyelid, and grow little by little until they cover all the sight and light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts their head in your hand, then opens their eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	then lift the paper with your hand, then curl the finger like tweezers of small width, and stretch it over;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Then take a needle, and put in it a horse hair, or goat's hair, or cow's hair, and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the tip of the needle slightly and stick it into the finger, and pierce through with all the needle, and tie the finger with a thread and stretch it over, and scrape all along the hair's edge on the inside of the nail that goes between the skin and the hair up to the top, then cut off the remaining part at the root of the eyelid with a very fine spatula and gentle forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the eyelid so that tears do not flow through the incision as usual.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And sometimes the nail stands up on its own and on the string, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then scrape off all the fat from this meat; here is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And ensure that the spathulum does not touch the delicate tissue and break it, and that the probe is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	And after the incision, pour in a little powdered sage, and make a poultice with litharge, leaving it until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat this wound as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nerve-like and you cannot insert the needle, and the tweezers will not fit, many times this type of nail can be treated with medications.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And they grow as I described in the section on division; and if you see them opening, immediately perform the eye of the patient and take a light stroke with the spathulum according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And raise the nail gently upwards, and if you see that it does not decrease in size and the bone presses close afterwards, then distill from your mouth onto a hot coal made of litharge and red ochre ground together, and plug the eye until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then begin the other operation according to this same procedure, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is any obstacle in the eye that opposes this operation, such as a hot aposteme, then apply cold compresses and first treat the hot aposteme until it is healed; then resume the operation as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear duct harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with sinew and cut off part of it, but not all of it, so that tears may still come.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill onto the eye red hot coal made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	And regarding the flesh that grows upon the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	In some men's eyes, red flesh sometimes grows, covering the pupil and pressing on the membranes, turning towards the front, resembling awart.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the operation is that the patient places his head in your hand, then you open their eyes and coil all of that flesh with suitable tweezers for this purpose, and hold it firmly;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then cut the first hair, and keep cutting all the way down to the skin until finished, but be careful not to wound the eye during the process.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And make the incision of the spur small like we said in cutting the nail and the little forces with which one removes the bone, as shown later in this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And once the incision is complete and all flesh removed, apply to the eye a powdered salve or distill upon it red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines; then place cotton soaked in egg white over the eye so that it may be securely bound with a warm plaster.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	And if anything remains and the heat increases, and you doubt a hot inflammation, then leave the eye alone and treat the inflammation with things that alleviate heat.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work until it is safe, and so do for every flesh joined in the eye by this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nevertheless you must align the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural course.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and in accordance with its accidental course, particularly using iron instruments;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But do not perform any of these operations until you see that the member can withstand them.
des voines des eulz	"of the veins of the eyes"
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Before there are red veins that cover the eye, they veil its work and weaken sight every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is therefore necessary that you first examine whether the eye in which the stone is present is protruding, and if there is no other external disease besides the stone;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then treat it in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to place their head on your lap, then gently compress those veins on both sides according to your discretion, and make the bandage thin and doubled in this manner:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	"And there should be two bandages placed at intervals along one course according to this shape:"
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then gently compress those veins thusly, and wipe away the blood immediately afterwards, until you see that the veins outside the eye are retracted;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And ensure that you do not cut the eye with the points of the forceps, and perform this operation at midday facing the sun, being very careful in your work so that you do not injure anything but those veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And once you have done this, then distill in the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the sediment.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you are unable to collect all of this at that hour, then make a plaster for the eye with soothing substances for the pain in the eyes, and leave it on for several days until the pain is alleviated and the heat of the abscess is assured, then resume according to this manner which is written before until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And this is the form of the poultice:
de la fistule de l’oil	"of the fistula of the eye"
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The surgeon calls a fistula 'arissati'
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you treat it with cautery and with burning hot medicine as I said before, and it is not yet healed, then know that there is something inside which you should incise over the abscess where it must be cut open, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then you must use all of the instruments mentioned here for its form:
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and is called 'sharp head', and it should be made of iron from the crown downwards, and should be pointed like a file as it is in its current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place on the location of the rotten bone, then twist it between your fingers and press gently until you feel that the corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then apply drying medicines to the location.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the location is solid and flesh grows back, and the body of the bow is solid, and remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew itself nor become infected, and no bad accident occurs, then know that it is healed;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines, and when it is uncovered take the chisel according to this form, with an iron head having three angles, and the handle tapered all the way to the tip as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place it on the bone near the ear, and keep your hand away from the eye. Then turn the drill until it pierces the bone; the patient will feel this because the vein will then flow out if their hand is on their nose.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	Then restore the place with dry medications as I have taught you. When the flesh grows and the joint hardens, then go to the nose.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	It is easier for the patient this way.
de l’issue de l’oil	Regarding the issue from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eye opens completely in every direction and there is no obstruction to the nose or diminution, then you must bandage the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then wash the eye, then apply cupping glasses without touching to suck, then place on the eye a linen made of acacia and aloe and incense and saffron, then compress the eye, and cover it with bandages and cloths.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths and fold each one into four layers, then place them on top of each other according to how much the eye needs.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then tightly bind it with a firm bandage from above, and resume using cupping glasses to suck without striking.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the cupping glasses and keep the eye bound day and night; if it begins to loosen, then you must bind it tightly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the bandage after a day and night, and if you see the eye improving, that is good;
se ce non;	if not
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	then resume the emplastrum, dressings, binding, and cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Regarding the bursting of a blood vessel in the eye
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruption comes to the uveal membrane, then it appears, and fire comes out of the papers like grains of resin, which is frightening to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you see it covered, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below until it reaches the part above, then insert another needle where there is a doubled thread on the eyelid.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and pierce it through, leaving the first needle in place according to its position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	Then cut the spot with the double thread and tie one part of the vein around it, pulling it taut; then remove the needle and place a wet linen cloth moistened in egg white over the eye.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it remain until the threads adhere with the vein; then heal the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And sometimes the wound is held in place by each vein being bound with a circle of cloth until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye appears swollen, then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes from within the eye, and correct the moisture in the white of the eye, allowing it to descend; then insert it quickly.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	Regarding the bowing of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but mucus gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	The appearance of this disease is that you make the patient sit on an arranged and upright seat; then take their head between your two hands, and tilt it until you see the mucus come up to your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then let it be inserted, and not descend, and let the light be extinguished, and let the patient see things as they used to.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the bowel is not as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	Have the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula and cut through the corneal membrane near the junction of the conjunctiva with the cornea and sclera until the bowel emerges.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And once it is out, distill hot water mixed with honey or boiled fennel and honey onto it, then dress it further until it is clean.
des aigues de l’oil	Regarding the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have here the signs of acute [disease] in division, and those which ought to be pierced.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if you work according to the patient's condition.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	You must have the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, with the healthy eye tightly closed and held firmly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then place the eye paper on your left hand if the eyes are left [ones], or on your right hand if they are right [ones];
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your left hand, if the eyes are left ones, the instrument called "almagda," or in your right hand, if they are right ones.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea by the thickness of a grain at the part below the inner corner of the eye, then gently insert the instrument called "almagda," turning your hand until it pierces into the white of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the length of the almagda's pathway be equal to the distance from the pupil up to the end of the blackness.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	And this is the cornea of the eye.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone through this paper due to the clarity of the corneal tissue, then move the instrument until it reaches where the water is, then press down along one vein after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water rises now, then the patient sees before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After a short rest, if the water rises up the second pathway, place the funnel with the instrument, and when it is inserted and it does not rise, then gently remove the almagdah in a twisting manner bit by bit.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then add a drop of blue silk to the water, and rinse the eye with it inside and out.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place before the eye plugs made of wet wool in rose oil and egg whites, binding it with healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, we and those of our time place commin broie upon it with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are certain people who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	Therefore, pierce only the conjunctiva, not too deep but carefully; then insert the almagdah as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And upon completion of the procedure, prepare a comfortable bed for the patient to lie on his back in a dark place
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and keep him still from all movements; let him eat light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left. Bind him according to his condition for three days
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then untie him in the same dark room, examine his vision, and show him some things to look at. Then reapply the bandage for seven days
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it is not necessary that you do this during or after the incision now, but rather you should tie off that vessel, because water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If an abscess becomes hard, untie the eye before the seventh day, and apply what subdues the abscess;
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And once it has subsided, untie the bandage and place a compress soaked in honey to cover it for several days, keeping it always in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then slowly exit the house little by little, and return to his usual activities;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one from Iraq came to us and said that in his land people used to make something called 'almagda' for piercing, through which water is extracted. However, I have never seen any such thing in our land nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And perhaps it's something new.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the likenesses of the forms of algebra, so that those who do not know them may see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they should be made of pure silver:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their heads should be of this same subtlety, and the back in three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	Here are some ways to treat flesh growing on the nail:
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes nails or horseshoes are born twisted in various ways, among which some resemble scorpions with many feet;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	And there are also such ones where the iron has enchanted hair of dark color, and the skin has soft hair of fair color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	Therefore, in the case of a horse that is gentle and not enchanted, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nostrils, and throw the unicorn's horn at those horses, and draw them apart strongly;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	until you can no longer support it on the subtle point of the compass needle on one side, until you know that the horse is completely exhausted.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if anything remains that cannot be coped, then open it with all the subtle tools lightly, so that nothing remains;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	And if blood does not mount up, or a hot abscess appears, then cut as it is necessary.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if it is malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is removed, then pour on quicklime and vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If nothing happens, and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is incurable;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if moisture does not reach as it should, know that there is flesh grown into the bone above, to which the instrument cannot come to cut:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Then you must insert a thread of fine linen, slightly thickened with our hands, and have it dampen between each knot.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	And let the patient place the head of the thread in his nostril with some force, and pull on it with care until it comes into the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	Many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for one who wishes to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then grasp the head that comes from the snow with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart gently one after the other, following our method which they are in.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the nerves have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the threads, squeeze out the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian gum, and replace it in the snow as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the poultice has corrupted all that remains of the flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	And then place in the snow a cake of lead for several days until it is dry, and if there is need for drying medications, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, where oils and medications are distilled in the snow:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a pipe, with the conduit also.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see one, make a closed cane and let the instrument be full to purge the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And have many hands at the head to hold it when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Here are some ways to treat flesh growing on the nail:
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times there arises on the head a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large continually until it is visible to look at.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And therefore you must cut it off at the beginning, and scrape away all fur, then place on level the cautery or burning medicine.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	But if one delays cutting until it is large, take heed whether it is hard, of dark color, and lacks sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	If not touched by iron for it is an enchanted abscess; for when one cuts it, great harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	But if the abscess is soft to touch, not dark in color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then let the patient empty and cut it without fear, and cure the area with drying and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	"When the boil is cut and closed"
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know this: when humors accumulate in one of these joints, they profit little there, especially in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary when this happens to anyone, to look whether the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then join the two lips together in a stitch, and then treat it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips are already separated on both sides, then you must cauterize all parts of their edge until they heal, then join the two lips together in a stitch, and bind it, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood powder and ground incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place over the powders a piece of strong plaster or another sticking plaster, and leave it until it adheres by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of stitching is that you bring together...
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or by needles, as we have said in the abdominal suturing.
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	"boils on the lips"
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Many people have hard tumors inside the lips, resembling grains of millet, small and large;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Then it is necessary for you to turn back the lips, and cut along each nostril, and grasp it with forceps and cut in every part.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then fill the space after the incision with powdered vitriol until the blood is stanched.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then the wound should be stitched up, and the area dried with dry cloths until it is clean
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Often there appears on the fleshy gum a growth called "albulus" by the ancients;
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	then you must hold it with forceps and cut at its root, allowing the vein or blood to flow freely
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then apply powdered vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders to the area
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that flesh returns after being cut, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after cauterization
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	And these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of boils
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Some times they are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scars which are ugly and sharp.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-green and worm-ridden, such that corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell bad.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	Thus you should make the patient sit between your hands, and their head be in your lap, and scrape the teeth where the scars appear, until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And thus do likewise for the blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains, until they are cleaned.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if one removes what is at its root cause, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not, then recommence on the second and third day, until you have scraped all.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And know that teeth require various forms of tools to scrape, according to what the task shows, for those used to scrape between teeth have different shapes than those used to scrape on teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these forms and others are to be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	When treating a toothache, delay pulling the tooth as long as possible, for this should not be done at all;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a very high substance until there is no excuse for extracting it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained by thirst, you must be certain of the tooth that is aching.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Often the pain leaves the patient and they believe it is in a healthy tooth, so they have it pulled;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	but still the pain does not depart for that reason, since the evil has already been extracted, as we have seen in many cases.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are certain about the aching tooth, then it is necessary to scrape around it with a scalpel, deeply enough to protect the gum from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move it gently with your fingers or fine pliers at first, until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp it with the forceps;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And hold the patient's head between your knees so that they cannot move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take any of these instruments and put it gently on each side, and with the lever move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if a tooth is pierced and eaten away, then you must fill it with wadding where the hole is.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	And if he grasps it subtly with pliers, that it may not break while extracting;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And one must operate much around the gum to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And see to it that you do not break it, and if a piece remains, it will cause the patient greater pain due to the root's mischief.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeons who through their haste and boldness sometimes break the cheekbone, and do not bring about what we have mentioned;
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but by their carelessness, great diseases sometimes occur due to the roots that remain there, or because of the cheekbone they break, as we have often seen;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the tooth is pulled out, wash the place with wine, vinegar, and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	And if bleeding occurs, which often happens, fill the place with powdered vitriol;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments with which one moves the teeth first should be long-pointed and have thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large limbs so that they do not bend at all during traction, and let them be of iron well-made, and let them be toothed for holding movement.
de la racine des dens	Of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in place during tooth extraction, you must apply cotton moistened with butter for one or two days until the area is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefree", so that the head appears like a bird's beak.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should also be shaped within like a file, which is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called 'althali', that is, the crowbar, of which this is the shape:"
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out by itself, that is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, then use all the instruments, whose shapes are shown hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if one uses this tool that has two handles, of which this is the shape:"
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	"and other iron tools that are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this tool that resembles large pliers, of which this is the shape:"
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let this instrument be strong so that it cannot break, and know that there are many instruments for teeth.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments which are not enumerated
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the wise master finds his instrument by himself, according to what his works and the illness reveal, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of ailments. And if he breaks a bone or others, where it is necessary, then he seeks the instruments that are required, as I have told you, and helps with gestures; this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone so it doesn't slip away, but can grasp and remove it;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And then restore it to its place with appropriate medicine, and if there is rot in the bone, even if it's small, remove it with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When teeth appear not according to the natural body, and their form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is near the other tooth, but not in the right place, and cannot be removed or filed:
adonques lou raie;	then pluck the hair
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is hard with the teeth, then take this instrument of which there is the form below, and it resembles a small beak, and be made of iron well sharpened at the end
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	"And tap the tooth lightly every day for several days to soften it and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent enough to be filed, then file it with such a file as this one has here its shape:"
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the file used to make needles.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	file the teeth gently little by little over several days so that they do not move until they fall out
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then finish it off with any plain razor at the end, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then file down its sharpness until it is even so that it does not hurt the tongue or hinder speech
quant li dent lochent	"When teeth lock"
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When a tooth is knocked out in front, either by impact or by falling, and the patient cannot chew their food without it hurting them, and you have treated it with constricting medicines but to no avail
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	then tie it with a gold thread, for silver wire turns green and decays, but gold does not change
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And let my son's thread not be too thick nor too thin, according to the width of the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you see the teeth aligned, then take the thread and a doubled needle between two healthy teeth, and place the heads of the needles between the misaligned teeth, one or more, until you reach bleeding up to the next healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then resume the threading up to the point where you began, and gently pull your hand steadily until there is no movement.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut off the heads of the thread with pliers, join them together, and pass them between the healthy tooth, placing them in such a way that they do not injure the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	Then leave it as tight as possible without causing harm, and if it loosens or the thread breaks, then bind it with another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it remains thus and serves this way throughout its time, then that is the shape of teeth and the direction of growth of the two upper and two lower teeth, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when a tooth falls out, it should be put back in its place, little by little, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and let not the foolish and impatient meddle with it, and sometimes a tooth made of cow bone is used, placed where the gap is, and secured as we have said, and it remains thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	"To cure the tie of the tongue"
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this tie comes from below the tongue at birth;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by chance due to a healed wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the operation is such that you open the patient's mouth and place their head on your lap, and lift their tongue
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nerve tie from behind until the tongue is freed from its attachment, and if there is scarring or hard tissue, due to an old wound, then insert a hook and cut it away.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	And ensure that the cut is not too deep, for the artery below.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	Once done, lift up warm rosewater and vinegar, or cold water, then place a linen cloth beneath the tongue.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	And have the patient apply this every night so that the wound does not dry out.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	If blood comes flowing out, then place crushed vitriol on the location.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the blood does not clot, cauterize it with the slow-acting cautery, which is good for this purpose.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	If you see a boil that is red or black or hard, even if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	If it leans toward blenching and has moisture, sprinkle onions there, cut it with a fine spatula, and open it on both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if your blood fails you during your work, grind vitriol and apply it until it is staunched; then return to your work until all bleeding has stopped.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift the bandage and dressing, and treat with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Here is a translation of the text you provided about swollen glands in the neck:
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes bits of stone appear in the throat which are called 'godaths'; properly speaking they are called the two amygdalae. When you treat them as we have described in this section and yet they do not heal, then be cautious:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If they are hard abscesses with a small opening and dark red color, then do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if they are red and the root is large, then do not touch them with iron; likewise for the flow of blood.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it be until it rots, and then you will divide it, or else it would burst by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is white and the root is thin, then prepare the instruments to cut; but first check whether the abscess is warm, rests quietly, and is quieted.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then seat the patient before the sun, their head in your hand, and they open their mouth, and the servant takes it between his hands, and presses down on the tongue with all the instrument; this is the form:
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And it should be made of silver or fine brass, like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	While pressing the tongue with this instrument, if you see the boil, then take the awl and pierce it into the almond, and draw it forth from above as far as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	And pull out some cloth with it, then wipe the instrument clean; this is the form that resembles a sieve:
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Moreover, their ends are curved and turned towards each other, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or brass;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if you do not have this instrument at hand, cut it with pincers, which are shaped thus:"
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And on one side it is sharp, and on the other blunt:
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And once you have cut one boil, then cut the other in the same manner, and afterwards the patient should gargle with hot water mixed with salt, and if blood flows copiously, then the patient should gargle with water in which cooked pomegranate rinds or myrtle leaves have been steeped, until the bleeding stops;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then perform the treatment until it is healed.
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the tonsils; cut them accordingly like the tonsils.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat; namely, a small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And the throat was almost entirely closed, so that the woman could hardly breathe because of the obstruction, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died within two days had it remained thus.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had already risen so much that it had filled both passages of the throat with two raindrops each.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	So I promptly made an incision with a scalpel on one side, then extracted a large portion of the boil.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then I reopened the other side of the abscess and opened its mouth, pressing down the tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	Afterward, I cut into these abscesses with a scalpel, cutting off part of them, and only a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And thus the woman's throat passage was opened again, and she began to drink water and then wine. And I continued to cut into that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscesses kept cropping up again, filling the space I had emptied out until they became very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	So then I pierced it and cauterized it inside its throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	Thus it remained without growing any further.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I departed from these parts, not knowing what God did with him afterwards.
de l’uve	"de l'uve"
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When rheum descends to the eye and it is inflamed and protuberant, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is below large and round, it is called "eyeball".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When the eye is treated as we have said in the section on division, but the treatment does not help at all, and you see that the inflammation has subsided, and it remains subtle, then you must pierce it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	And that which is round and gathered together without being protuberant;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	And if it is blood-red or dark-colored or black, then you must avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient in doing so.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is therefore necessary, when you see it according to the manner I have spoken of, regarding its blemish and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument whose memory we have mentioned earlier;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the awl into the eye, and draw it downwards, and cut with one of the two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two eyelids.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cut further than the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cut more, you harm both sight and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, apply what we have said about the cutting of the two eyelids, until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears being cut, then you must use a device for cauterization to alleviate their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of cautery is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then you press his tongue with the instrument mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and heat the forceps with live coals so that it is neither too thick nor too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And when using this tool, of which the form follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And it has at its head a small vessel where one places the medicine, like the head of a spoon, and sets the tool upon all the medicine on the ulcer;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	And let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus from their mouth do not mix with the medicine, so it does not reach the throat or the lung.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the ulcer for about half an hour until you see it is darkened and the absorption of the medicine is complete;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some tool, wet the cotton in the medicine, and place the tool against all the cotton in the vein until the cotton adheres to the ulcer;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry and fall off after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to recommence the cautery of the medicine, then recommence it, and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, cleansing that which is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be rinsed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is clean
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is better than the incision or cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and marjoram and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them in one pot, and put it on the fire to boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot has an iron comb made in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And be of silver or brass, and one of the heads be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is anesthetized;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After the inflammation begins frequently until the eye becomes dry, and ensure that you do not perform this at the onset of a hot abscess formation, for many things can happen there.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not do it except when declining a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and put at its tip an eggshell, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the eggshell does not let much steam harm the mouth, and this is a good remedy together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times an object like a bone or fish spine becomes lodged in the throat;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	Therefore you must pull out what you can see and press the tongue down with the instrument so that you can see the object move;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And what you cannot see and is stuck in the throat, make the patient vomit before the food becomes cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	By chance, if the thing were to go bad through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	And ties it to the sponge with thread, and then swallows it
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	And when it comes to its place, so it will harden, and then pull it out
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not come out through what we have said, then take the instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have its head raised high
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	And take care not to touch the epiglottis, that all the way may go down, nor push the bone in
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	But let the patient move the instrument there, so that he knows where the thing is stuck;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Then push it down until you pull it out evenly with the whole instrument, until it comes out entirely.
de la sansue de la gorge	Here's a possible translation for "de la sansue de la gorge":
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No bloodletting is performed, as I mentioned earlier in this section;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And if this does not help, then examine the throat of the patient towards the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument I have mentioned.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood vessels, then draw them out little by little with tweezers, or with fine forceps suited for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if bleeding does not help, then take a cane tipped with iron and put it into the patient's throat, then put at the tip of the cane a hot piece of iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	If the patient sweats all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take a full view of cold water, open the mouth, pour it in without letting them swallow, and move it with your hand frequently.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And as soon as the blood feels the water, it falls.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida using the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times until it falls without staining.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is as follows: take a pot containing live coals and place it on a stand covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and insert the head of the instrument into this hole.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then cast your fumigation upon it, and the patient places the head of the cane in his mouth, closing the mouth so that no smoke escapes, but reaches the sinew.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and if the sinew does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and let the patient suffer thirst and eat salty foods but drink no water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Then it will be necessary for him to evacuate heat through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	The shape of the instrument used to treat the sinew appears, when visible, like curved tongs for entering into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it resembles a goose's beak and is rough like a file, so that what it grasps it cannot let go.
et vez ci la forme:	Here is the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	Chapter on Abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many types of abscesses are described hereafter in this book, differing in perforation and incision;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	And this is of two kinds, one like itself, and what it holds moist.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the places where they occur on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and those on fatty tissue are different from those that come in joints; each has its own judgment in operation.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	But some abscesses should not be pierced until the bowels have died according to their completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And there are those which must be pierced when they are ripe and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses occur near joints and are left until they are completely surrounded by pus, sometimes the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	When the abscess is near the main member, if you delay piercing it until it has died, it will harm the main member;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	Or when it's near the fundament, pierce it before it dies.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And do not pierce a ripe abscess without completing its digestion except for the one near the fundament lest it rotted internally and create a fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you must know the time to pierce an abscess that has died according to its completion when the pain is appeased and the fever departs, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And you must make the incision where the abscess is most dependent and where it opens moved.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And let the incision be long along the body; and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and near arteries, and in all places equal where there is no wrinkling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In cases where it pleases, according to this member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the flesh, it is best that you delay their perforation until they are firm and digestion is complete, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	But if you pierce it before that time, then the body will be extended with its venom, and it will be filled with much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	And perhaps the lips become hardened and the depth of it becomes difficult
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And some abscesses should be pierced according to the width of their body, according to what the member requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you must bring for small abscesses, small incisions;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and for large abscesses, large incisions, and many slits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to chop with the knife, and cut;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When they have become like a blister and are deadened, then you must do as one does for boils
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	And there are such ones which are split into three angles; and there are also such ones which are cut like the cap of a fir tree, as abscesses in the armpits.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And there are those where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those which have no head, like a soft superficial abscess, must be pierced directly.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when the abscess is large and has formed much bow, you should pierce it but not draw out all of the bow at that time, but only a part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more afterwards;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this several times gradually increasing it until all of the bow comes out;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Even if the patient is of weak strength, or a pregnant woman, or young children, or elderly feeble men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Because sometimes the spirit leaps with the release of the bowstring, causing the patient to die unexpectedly.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore approach this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then open the wound and observe if the wound from the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it is a simple cut, then bring linen or old cotton pads.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it's a large abscess with many holes, you must insert a pad into each so they touch each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have cut off a piece of skin from the abscess and shaved around it, then fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth lint without moisture, and bind it for three days.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then bone-set, and apply ointment until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your procedure, bring cold water and a basin, wet a cloth in it, and place it on the bleeding area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the bleeding persists, bring medical care and treatment, and apply the powders mentioned earlier in this book, especially during wintertime when the affected area is very tense. Then place warm, moist cloths soaked in wine and oil on top of pads.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it is during summer and the area is fleshy, then place moist cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have mentioned.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove the abscess and heal it, as is necessary, until it is sound.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And these things he should know universally in treating abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	As I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, here is that chapter.
des soros	Here are some key points about boils (soros):
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	And small boils come from the head, and they are like those on hens' wattles, appearing in large numbers.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and such where there is moisture like feathers;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And there are some that are hard and stony at the cut, and there is no doubt that an artery opposes it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And this is how one performs the procedure of amputation: first, test all instruments called 'entromissoires', from which the form comes that follows, and what they contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	But if it contains moisture, then open it carefully over a long period.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture has been drained, scrape off without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately if anything is left.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if available;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, then in water and salt, and use it to dress the wound, leaving it until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And these things will run their course for those that remain of the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then resume with cotton as before on the second day and the third, until you are sure there is no more left of the night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it is clean.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the swelling holds firm and fat, cut it according to this shape, long;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and cast your onionskins thereupon, and scrape off all around it, and take great care to draw out the coat wherein it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery opposes you, then do as I told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And similarly, cauterize an abscess if it is hard, cut it open, and treat it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cutting into a hard and moist abscess is easier, since there is little blood involved.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if some of these swellings have no moisture at their head, and those old swellings that I cut off from the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	I found the swelling like a hard, sharp, white stone, and could not be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if one had tried to strike it, they would have made as great a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other swellings that come on the head, besides those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of ears, let the opening always be made in the lowest place possible, so that the bowels may more easily issue.
et les cure si com il covient.	And heal them as it is necessary.
des scrophules	"of scrofulas"
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and under the armpits, and among the anus, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and are interconnected.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each boil is properly located within its own skin, like the naevus and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and there are many similar kinds of these boils.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are evil ones that do not wish to obey healing.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	In the one that you see with good position to touch, and is similar in color to the body, and moves from each side and is not hard against the nerves of the neck nor the artery nor the channel, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	then you should cut it from above and scrape each part, and stretch the two lips of the wound once, if necessary, as we have said about abscesses on the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And cut it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and that the scalpel is not too sharp or cutting too deep, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut a vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then place powdered vitriol or some powders that stop blood in the wound, and press the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound begins to soften and rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is stopped, return to your work until you complete it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then look at your finger for any small scabs, and cut them off and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, then you should not cut off that scab at its base, but tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it fall off without harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then fill the wound with thick cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the entire scab, then it is necessary that you join the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that there remains no excess due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you must understand to cut the root of it, and draw out fire, and stitch as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scabs that hold excess fluid, prick where they open and die;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And pierce it thus as the one mentioned before, depending on it; then apply dressings with salve and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well cleaned, treat it internally with ointment until it is healed.
de squinance	de squinance could refer to "squinance" in Old French, which means "a kind of skin disease, scrofula".
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of cutting the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw it done in our land, and that is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have choking fits, the fold of the throat called 'epiglottis' must be cut;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and help should not be given because all the veins and organs of the patient are hot due to an abscess in the mouth or throat.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the membrane, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore necessary that when we want to cut the epiglottis, we do so below three circles or four with a small slit across between two circles, or through its length, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And these places are so close to the epiglottis that there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long on either side.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the neck all around the goiter before cutting through it until it reaches the jugular vein.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	Avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then cut the sciatic nerve as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by cutting the vein of the goiter which suddenly gushes forth from its broken place, and by loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	Leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed during which strangulation is feared, join together both lips of the wound around the heart and sew it up entirely without cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines that promote the growth of healthy flesh.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that this procedure should not be done unless the patient's throat is completely blocked and they are judged to be near death, otherwise there will be damage.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore cut off the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow and breathes through the wound, thus avoiding death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And for this reason the ancients commanded that the wound should be left open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded that the wound be sewn up and dressed, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a damsel take a knife and stick it in her throat, cutting some of the vessels there.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to heal her, but found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I examined the wound and saw that blood had come out of it, and I knew that she had not cut her veins or arteries except for those in her throat, from which the windpipe was protruding through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried and sewed the wound, and cared for it until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And nothing happened to the damsel except that her voice became hoarse, and afterwards she returned to her former state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore I say there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of a large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This swelling is called 'throat hernia,' and is a large swelling of yellowish color, common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	And there are two kinds:
naturez, et accidens;	Essences, and accidents;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Or natural has no engine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And accidents are of two kinds; one is similar to flesh that grows on us, and the other kind is like an abscess that comes from an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, but one should not operate with great fire except in the case of a small one; prove and search through all the introitor.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it like other flesh and not connected to any vein, cut it, as one cuts flesh, and remove all of its skin if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And search well around it, and heal it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	fatty tumors
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many kinds of flesh, all of which I will describe their likenesses;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now I must explain the difference between flesh and bone.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that bone is hot and holds fever until boiling has passed, and corruption is complete;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Then let fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	Without pain, heat, or fever, the nut has no sweat, and contains a white fluid that is like its own sack, matching the color of the body, beginning as a drop, then growing large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they are according to two appearances: either fatty or moist, and many have colors as mentioned in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat dislocation, first examine and inquire about all the instruments called "intromittent" according to how their forms come in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of examining nasal abscesses is to press on the moistest area you find in the abscess, turning your fingers bit by bit until you know that the instrument has pierced the skin, then proceed according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the trocar, ensuring nothing jumps out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If running moisture is found, regardless of its color, open it as mentioned for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if no moisture comes after the trocar, know that it is fatty, so cut it in a cross shape, grasp it with forceps, and lightly scrape each side, then carefully remove the coating where it rests without harming the nut.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	If anything remains, the wound will reopen many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if some remains and the blood bothers you, then sprinkle the wound with certain watery corrosive powders, bind it tightly, and apply warm soothing things to the inflammation, and continue treating it until it heals;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the wound is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat those that are near flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if a beating vein is against you or other such, then quickly apply powdered vitriol to the wound's location, leave it for two or three days until the wound rots, and let the blood's ebullition rest;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to cauterize what remains of the wound.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Here are the forms of exploratory instruments, and they come in three types:
grans et moien et petit;	Great, medium, small
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	And there are 3 pieces called "albarets", and 1 called "breb", of which there are three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 large, medium, and small to encircle the fistulas' abscesses;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 and are also like the needles used to sew wounds; they are made of yellow brass or iron or silver, with those that are yellow being more valuable, and are particularly preferred for encircling the curves of fistulas
et sont de III manieres:	 and come in three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 large, medium, and small according to the size of the holes' width.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The shapes of the forceps are very similar, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 Large, medium, and small
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 And there are also forceps with two curves in three types:
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 And there are also forceps that have three curves and come in three kinds
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 And there are also forceps with two curves, and those with only one curve, which come in three kinds
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these knives are sharp, and there are some that cut only on one side, from which we strip the nerves to avoid cutting the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these trocars are those placed in handles so that the patient does not notice them during the opening of abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	And they come in three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	Large, small, and medium-sized, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And they should only be used in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, angles, and similar locations;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	Moreover, another small instrument resembling the skin of a fist is made according to this form, with which blood is wiped away:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	"And it is sometimes placed at the site where there is danger of cutting veins or arteries, and some are made in this large size:"
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to be corrupted, appearing like those of a woman;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain unsightly and swollen; anyone wishing to treat them should follow this form from line .b. to .g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape away the fat, fill the wound with medication between layers of flesh, then bring together the two lips of the wound to stitch them closed, and treat it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast hangs down and is enlarged like in some women, cut it open through two similar incisions on top.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one holds onto the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape: .b. up to line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape away the skin between the two lips and remove the fat. Apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and do whatever is necessary in treating it until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it does not heal, or the incision is not complete because the patient refuses to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let him chew on the remaining flesh and fat until it is clean.
des apostemes des asselles	"Boils in the armpits"
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	"These boils that appear under the arms are hard, with knots, and some contain moisture."
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	He who contains moisture must have the following form cut from the line .b. to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when all the matter inside the boil has been emptied out, then fill the wound with cotton wool and leave it until the following day, then remove all the cotton wool and dress it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed."
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	"If the boil resembles a scrofula, then incise it as we have said for scrofula incisions, and if the wound discharges matter, then apply a cautery as we have said before."
de la routure de l’artere	"Surgical procedure for arterial bleeding"
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When an artery bursts and the skin above is burned shut, many abscesses often form; likewise with a swollen vein and an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if one recognizes it as such when it is for the artery, then the abscess will be long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	When you sense it with your fingers, you feel tension.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when it is for the vein, it appears swollen and dark-colored
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is foolish to cut into this abscess, especially when it is located under the armpits and groin areas or in the neck and many other places where it would be very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, one must avoid cauterizing with fire and also the person in charge should avoid doing so, especially when it is an inflammation of an artery that has burst through the skin over a long period.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then make an incision at the joints and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then place a needle beneath one side, and pierce it until it reaches the other side, and tie off the artery with a doubled thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then prick the place between the two ligaments with an introjector until the blood flows out that is there, and let the abscess be lanced.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then perform the treatment as in a bowed inward wound, until the ligament falls off.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat those with appropriate ointments until they are healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is due to the incision of a vein, then you should cut around the entire skin of the abscess with your hand, then place the needle beneath the spot you are holding and pierce it until there is one doubled thread that can be pulled from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie off the abscess, as I have told you, with the ligament of one of two parts using the thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the thread is not hot enough, then insert another needle alongside all the threads below the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut away the abscess until the surplus comes out; then cut away the surplus from the heart and leave what is tied.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put a cloth dampened in wine and oil on it; then apply dressings and poultices until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	"Boils on the nerves"
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	"So boils can also occur on nerves when they are struck or from too much physical exertion and similar causes."
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens most often at shoulders and hips, and in all places where there are joints; it is a serious abscess, its color resembles the color of flesh, and it occurs in many ways without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is pressed strongly, the patient feels pain, but it is not deep within the body, rather below the heart.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And it moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, down or up; those that are in joints should not be cut with a knife:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	It might happen that there would be contraction there.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And he who is at the head or forehead, cuts the skin with a scalpel.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, grasp it with tongs and cut it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, suspend it with forceps and scrape it, then remove the bone and sew the wound closed, caring for it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	"hanging pouches"
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes this occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "funge" due to its resemblance; it has thin roots and large heads.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	And among them there are some small ones and many very large ones.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	I have seen someone who had two in the belly that were more like fungi than anything else; they were white, had fine roots, and were often split open, with moisture always flowing from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them out and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6; upon opening them, it was evident that the patient was moist, with the flesh appearing pale, moist, and having fine roots.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If he strikes the shoulder blade widely, and if there are cauteries with fire before you.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For in cutting, it often happens that too much blood flows out, and if the blood gushes forth, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the cut by iron, then take a well-made string of lead, and tie the artery as we have said, leaving it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	And then bind it, and do not cease twisting the string of lead until you strike the artery, and cut through it without labor.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are large, then one fears cutting even for the belly, but you can indeed cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut the lobe which is of fox-like color, poor sense, and produces milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an enchanted aposteme, and I will come to the cure of cancer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil has burst
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If swelling appears due to cautery of a wound or incision from syphilis, and it is on the belly and in some cases among the bowels, as happens with other sores, or from blood issuing from veins or arteries according to what is before
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it's due to the rupture of the spleen and the exit of bile, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and there are various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the outlet of the intestines, then it is more diverse. And when you press it with your fingers, it rises up and then returns. And sometimes it is seized, and greatly enlarged at the entrance of the anus and by violent effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it's due to moisture, it's a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it's due to blood, then the abscesses open with these signs: large and hard, and are stuck according to a certain quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to windiness, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see if the appearance is for arterial blood, or venous blood, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestines or the bladder, then you must command the patient to stain their armpit and stretch it out straight, then press all around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command them to lie still between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with all the spatula, then stretch half of the abscess upwards with the whole large finger.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then wrap it around with a strong thread or silk cord tightly, and let it remain so.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then open half of the boil over the ligature, and insert your index finger into it to search for the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught in the ligature, untie it, and bring the intestine out of the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the boil, grasp it with forceps and cut off its excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	If the artery or vein opposes you, go around it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, thread two strong threads through them, and insert the two needles around what you have done in a cross-stitch pattern;
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then press the boil in four places over the needles, and if you see fit, remove the needles, leaving them there until it rots, and cut away the dead flesh.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	And when it becomes subtle and rotten, cut it off there, then treat what is necessary, and cauterize the boil as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	Extract the blood or moisture that you find,
dou chancre	chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken of the likenesses of chancre in the division [of this book], and how one ought to operate by means of medicines there, and how one should avoid the cure with iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And we say the chancre that invades the marrow, and great caution in its treatment. The ancients said that when chancres are located where they can be shaved, such as those on breasts, hips, and similar areas, one should remove them entirely at the onset.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when it is large and old, do not attempt to approach it, for I have never seen any healed in such cases.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	Never has anyone been cured of it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And when the operation is in a location where it can be removed, as we have said, you should purge the patient of black bile once.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make him fast if he shows signs of repletion, then place the patient in a good location to perform the operation.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then pour on your ointments around the cancer, and shave all the hair off, and scrape away everything without leaving anything.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And let the blood flow freely, and press well on the spot with your hand or any object; if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein troubles you, cauterize it until the blood stops.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with other treatments until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already discussed in the section on dropsy its similarities, how water collects in it, and the signs of each type, and treatment by medications, and that treated by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	So is this one specifically mentioned.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	And in these two types, one should not touch them with iron:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	Namely, tympanites and hydrocele, for they are deadly.
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore, when treating this type of dropsy called 'eclipses' with medications and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as coughing, diarrhea, etc.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If you do not touch iron to it, there is doubt [about its effectiveness].
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if you see the patient with strong vitality, and they have no other illness but dropsy alone, and are not too young nor too old, then you should proceed thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Lift the patient upright onto your hands, and have the assistants press the abdomen using water at its lowest part, then take the spine in this manner:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be sharpened at both ends.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	At an angle, but not so deep that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and not sharp enough to wound;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then observe whether the dropsy has entered towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	If so, you must make three incisions directly below the navel using a knife;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make your incision to the left of the navel.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it is due to worms, then make your incision on the right side, and ensure that the patient does not lie directly above where the incisions are made so that excess fluids do not drain into this weak area.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce all the hide with the instrument and insert it; raise your hand entirely over the spatula between the hide and the skin as in flaying, to the quantity of one nail or even more around.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the skin until the spatula reaches its proper place; this is where the water emerges. Then heat this instrument and insert it as follows:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a thin silver tube, made of brass or light iron, with a small hole at one end.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	And on one side, three holes
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	And two on the other side, and one on the other
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And the head is cut like a feather, this is the shape of the incision with which writers trim their feathers
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the top above is the funnel, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it should now be placed over it.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Empty it then of half or a third part; for if you empty more than is necessary at that time, the patient may perhaps die from the dissolution of his spirit by the weapon, or fall into a swoon, or approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	But pour out according to its quantity of power, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his breath.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then draw the instrument and hold the water, which is now retained by the heart blocking the opening that is above the stomach, as I have spoken about, piercing according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then recommence the instrument on another day if you see the patient enduring these things, and draw out a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this for several days, but be careful not to draw too much so that only a little bit of water remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water in him, then treat it with hot salt or sand, and often wash him with sweat or baths and sun exposure, and apply ointments to drink.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And treat with drying medications until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	"Regarding the obstruction of the instrument"
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without any opening in their penis, or with a small opening, or one that is not in the correct place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it needs to be done immediately, pierce it with a very fine spatula according to this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then place over the hole this thin tin covering, and secure it, holding it thus for three or four days. When he wishes to urinate, remove the cover, let him do so, and then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And perhaps there is no need for this, as the hot urine will not leave through the closed area.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose wound is small, let him apply clay of lead, as we have said; it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are handicapped, for some are born with the opening at the end of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they raise their penis upwards.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	They also cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the mouth of the urethra, and this is a serious condition.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of performing this operation is that the patient lies on his back. Then stretch out the head of the penis and bind it tightly like the shaft of a feather, so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware of bleeding that often occurs there, and if it does happen, stop it with whatever stops bleeding, and heal the wound until it is clean.
des pustules de la verge	"Regarding the pustules of the penis:"
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times these blisters come upon the penis, appearing as ugly flesh.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	And among them are malicious ones and non-malicious ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	Therefore, you should prick them with a fine needle, cut and cleanse all of them, then place moistened cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment upon them;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with diaphoretic ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the wound is malignant, foul-colored and foul-smelling, then you must apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it open and if the blister is on top of the penis with some part inside the foreskin and some outside, then you must first remove the blister that is inside;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And once it's removed, then treat what remains outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For if you treat them together, the head of the penis may be pierced, and blackness and corruption come to its tip and its opening.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour mixed with the peel of pomegranates and figs, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding starts, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauteries help with two conditions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	That is to say, for the removal of blood, and for gangrene;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a lead tube into the penis, and the patient will urinate through it;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the foreskin at the head of the penis is stuck, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or due to wound or abscess, then you must cauterize it with a hot iron until the bonds are released and the glans of the penis is freed from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	And if it is difficult to separate them, then you must cauterize with the spéculum some of the head of the penis and foreskin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then gently pull apart both sides, and place a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water between them so that it does not stick again.
de la circoncision	"Regarding circumcision:"
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Nevertheless when we perform this work of our will, especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best and easiest work for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	"I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience."
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For most masters and surgeons performing circumcision use irons, forceps, and an entire novacula
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	But if the heart fails because there are two layers, sometimes one is cut above and the other remains below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Otherwise, it should be cut again, causing double pain, and during healing, the tip of the member may not be securely attached.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And during healing of the nail, sometimes the iron slips, spoiling the work; many times they are born this way and do not require healing.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	"Regarding the cleansing that is done with forceps along the entire length of the thread, I have found through experience that it is good because forceps cut equally well above and below."
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, cut evenly in one second.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	But make sure the thread is tightly wrapped around the skin
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	And the manner of the first work should be that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the penis and not harming him in any other way
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then make it stay between your hands straight, and hide the tools under your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then place your hand on the neck and blow near the heart, and pull up until the head of the neck is inside;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the wound closed with a doubled thread, then tie below the pouch to the other string
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it there with the second ligature on the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two strings, then raise the heart quickly and pull the head of the neck
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow pouch and pouch, for that is the medicine;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and sprinkle powder on it and over the powder apply a cloth dipped in cooked egg yolk tempered with rosewater, mixed with good fresh rosemary oil, and leave it there until the next day, then treat again until healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the cauterization for purification is thus:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	Both heads [of the cautery] should be thin and sharp-pointed, and let them be as long as a finger evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The mistake in cauterization is when the heart is inside the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, you must stretch it to your fingernail before the boil appears;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then use forceps, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if it lasts for three days, and what is under the shaft is swollen, then leave it until the boil calms down, and gently scrape off the scab;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	Then cut as much as you can move, but be careful not to harm the part of the shaft, for it will do no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore, treat the place with sudden wound powder, which we have discussed in treating powders; and if you cut too much of the heart, it will not be harmed.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal it then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	"On the retention of urine"
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to obstruction from a stone, or coagulated blood, or bowel, or flesh born, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if urine is not released and you see that it is retained because of a stone lodged in the neck or bladder, then the patient must be bent forward on his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And let him put his feet on his back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and let the patient hold himself up as much as he can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And then the neck of the bladder is forced open for the expulsion of the stone above, whereupon the urine will be released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come out as we have said and the patient feels great pain, then you must use all instruments called "syngenes" for extraction.
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	And let there be a light, subtle silver chain, like the feather of a bird.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And let the chain be one and a half palms long, and thin at its end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a doubled thread, tie at its head a pouch of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And cut off the excess wool and put it up to the head of the syringe; then grease the syringe with oil or butter mixed with egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis; then fold the penis upwards towards the belly.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder; the patient will feel it when it is empty. But if this is not done correctly, it may be because the tube leading to it is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then they pull the thread all over the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the wool; then pull out the thread, and make the urine run.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and continue squeezing the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	Here are some examples of what "des maladies de la vessie" might mean in English:
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When the skin is peeled off and blood flows into the bladder, or putrefaction has gathered there, and you see that water and medications are being distilled from it, then use all the instruments called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It has three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	II on one side, and I on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the raised places where the medicine is applied should fit tightly around the penis so that it can be drawn closed without additional help to keep out moisture when needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see your medicine entering the bladder, place the head of the funnel in the moisture and draw up what is inside it
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	and then tightly plug the funnel.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	Then the moisture will enter and reach the bladder, causing the patient to feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And this is the form of the subtle enema used for bladder enemas
si est ci:	Here is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And is made of silver or lead, and the head is higher.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below it leans on the chest where the links fall;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you want to use for sitz baths; then tie it between both breasts with a good doubled thread and heat this moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then place the mouth of the sitz bath in the rectum, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has flowed into the bladder, so that the patient feels it has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it and pierce it evenly around the edges;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then insert a strong thread into these holes; then gather the circle together like a sieve and put inside it whatever oil, moisture, and water you wish, and tie it to the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	"de la pierre"
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have previously mentioned in the division the types of stone and their removal along with medicines.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And I have said the difference between a stone that enters the bladder and all its signs, and in which stone one should operate by cutting.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that stones which enter the bladder often happen in children, and it is a sign that water leaps from the bladder like water in its fineness;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it is apparent when hair appears, and grit is felt by the patient's penis, and he urinates many times and then becomes constipated.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	And often these are the fundamentals;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the cure of children is easy until they reach four years old, and it is very difficult in old men, and it is medium for those between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And the cure is easier for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes obstructs seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then seize the patient by the feet, tip him over and move him downward so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and ejects sometimes from the high place;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then locate it and touch it inside
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the space, then now hasten to cut upon the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall upon touching it all over, then moisten your left index finger with oil if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is an adult man.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and insert it into its base, and seek out the stone; when you feel it with your finger, then move it towards the neck of the bladder
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press upon your finger and expel it there where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the assistant to press upon the bladder with his hand; and command him to extend his right hand upwards with the scrotum, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the scrotum in the part where you will make the cut
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then pour in the spatumic acid, of which this is the formula:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make an incision between what is between the thighs and the fundament, not in the middle but on the left side toward the navel;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And let it be straight upon the stone, and your two hands always on the fundament; and make the incision across so that it is wide at its entrance but narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	In case the pressure causes the hand on the fundament to slip without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	And know that there are stones with corners and edges.
si est griés a issir;	If it is difficult to pass out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And some are smooth like a glass marble, and round, whose exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	For those with corners and edges, make the incision larger.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	And if it does not come out, then you must use tongs like a chisel's head to grasp and remove the stone so that it does not escape.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	When you place beneath the inflamed instrument its curved head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	And if you cannot manage it thus, then widen the little hole a bit, and if blood flows out, constrain it with powdered glass.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are more than one stone, then insert the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut it open, then remove the thread, and afterwards remove the smaller ones if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be so, and a larger wound must be made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	either he dies, or urine flows continuously from a place where flesh cannot heal;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	But nevertheless try to remove it using forceps or cutters until you remove it piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have completed your task, then fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and constrain it, and place upon it a moistened cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then raise the patient's head, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when you untie it, then wash the area very well with oil and water, then dress it with diapheconointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed."
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if an abscess occurs in the wound with corrosions and clots of blood in the bladder, causing retention of urine in this manner that it cannot pass without effort with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Therefore, apply a poultice to the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will harm the bladder and corrupt it.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then wash the wound with water and honey and salt, and help him in all ways that you know until he is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that every time you treat him, you bind his two thighs together and apply the medicine to its proper place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis and stuck within, and urine cannot pass out:
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	Then perform the treatment that I have mentioned earlier, cutting it many times until it is relieved from the cutting; otherwise, excuse yourself from this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tested it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	"Take one iron rod according to this shape and let it be forked at three ends stuck into one stick:"
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take some thread and wind it around the stalk below the stone so that it cannot move backwards into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then insert the drill gently into the stalk until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and slowly twist the drill by hand against the stone little by little until you can pierce the stone from the other side
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	When urine begins to flow, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the stalk.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it breaks soon, and flies out with the urine, then the patient is healed;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then cut the stalk at the stone between the two threads, then pull it out with forceps, untie the thread, and clean the blood clot from the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	"from the stone of women"
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It happens rarely that a stone enters the bladder of women; and if it does happen sometimes, its treatment is difficult and forbidden for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a well-known woman who reveals herself to physicians, especially if she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of midwery;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth manner is that the stones of the woman are more hidden than those of a man, for which one must make a deeper cut, causing great fear. And if you need to show them, then you must take a skilled midwife, and they are scarcely found, and if you do not find any, seek out a very learned and subtle female physician;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and the present one brings a very wise old woman knowledgeable in women's affairs or a woman who knows some part of this art, and commands her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and observe carefully whether the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	Then he must place his thumb on the foundation and search for the stone.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And if he finds it, let him press down on it with his thumb, and tell the patient to place their hand over the bladder, and then grasp and press strongly with their left hand.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, she must move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then strike the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the anus where it has moved, and feel for the stone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	And do not move your thumb above or below the stone, but make the first cut small.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	Then insert the knife into the cut. If you feel the stone, widen the wound until the stone can exit. Know that there are many types of stones.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	That is to say, some are small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and some have tails.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	and know the similitudes to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if your blood weakens, then place powdered vitriol in its place, holding it for an hour until the blood is stanched.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work until the stone is removed, having instruments that I told you about for extracting stones in men to help you with your task;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if blood weakens you, and this is from a cut artery, then place the powder on the spot and hold it with bandages and strips, do not resume cutting, leave the stone and do not extract it at all, for fear that the patient might die;
puis cure la plaie.	Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	"And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wound is healed, then return to your task until the stone is out."
de hernie carnouse	Hernia carnosum
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Rainwater is nothing other than a collection of moisture or clear urine, which is below the heart of hens and contains eggs;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syfac," but sometimes it is pure in the fabric of the egg itself, so one might think it was another egg;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and this is the skin of the pig between the white sinew which we have mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And if it's not hot, then no.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	"And the generation of this hernia is from weakness that comes to the intestines, and this matter is spread out."
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	Sometimes it comes from a blow to the joints, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	Or it is colored declining towards yellow, or it is without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and there are more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this gathering: if it is white like the sinew we have mentioned, then the abscess is solid and long like the shape of an egg, and it does not open the joints because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in its own skin, then the abscess is solid with a part of the egg white, and because of this people think it's another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	If the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white sinew, then one feels it well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all four corners of the surrounding area where the form is shown beforehand.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	"So according to what comes after the probe, judge what is inside."
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cauterize it with iron, it is necessary for the patient to be as healthy as possible and his body well-fed.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Then lay him on his back on something slightly raised, and place many cloths underneath him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit on the left side of the patient, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right side, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs on the right side of the chest.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the scalpel and cut through the skin of the chest along the line from the nipple to near the armpit, making a straight incision that divides the skin down to the white fat, scraping it off carefully according to your ability;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the fat with water using a large needle, extract all the water, and then place your bandages, stretching the skin upwards;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	And do not touch the heart of the chest, but only the skin.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Cut through all or in pieces the costal cartilage from below carefully, so that if you do not cut it sharply enough, water will flow back.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the egg jumps out of your way, replace it in its place once you have completed the task.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then join the two books of the heart of the lungs with stitches, then heal it like other wounds until it is sound.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then tie up the vessels that are suspended, preventing the flow of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the lung with all its suspension and remove the egg, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if water is gathered into two parts together, know that these are two branches.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	So cut the other part equally as you did the first, then suck out the blood, and put linen moistened in rose oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And put another linen moistened in wine and oil on top, place it over both lungs, cover with doubled cloths, and tie it all together according to this pattern:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two strips of cloth, and stuff them with wool bandages in this manner, and they should be sewn together at the waistband of the breeches, and one end should be taken up from the fundament to the back, and the other at the wrist.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and tie both ends together over the two angles, so that the bandage is fully assembled in the loop of the breeches;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes this bandage is used as a cautery in place of iron tongs; you should take one small scalpel cautery and scrape the skin around the boil, and heat it up as we have said, so that the white fat which contains water is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	then take this cautery in this manner and pierce that fat at its base with it, and scrape off the boil with this hot scalpel cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And scrape it all away in every way you can, until everything is scraped clean.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	And make sure that the fire does not touch the eye
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	And know that this work is safer;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and avoid blood loss during the operation; make sure the cutting process is done carefully;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything goes against you, such as a wound becoming inflamed or excessive bleeding or other issues, then treat what is going against you according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its frightening nature, then perform a perforation, as I tell you; for when you are certain by the signs that we have mentioned that the kidney stone is there, then make the patient sit on a raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then cut open the abscess on the part below to the whole spinal region widely, and insert the perforation deep into the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And make the opening wide enough so that all the water flows out freely;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place cotton on the wound and tie it, and leave it to allow the remaining water to flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not allow water to exit through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the tool used for drawing out water in hydropics, as shown above;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And widen the mouth of the wound, and know that water returns, and after six months or more it reassembles, and when it reassembles as before, then the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the boil on the buttocks
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the cutting of this branch there is fear and many dangers, therefore it seems better to leave it alone;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	I will tell you about the treatment and the like of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say therefore that many abscesses come to be in the body, especially in the joints;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this happens often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known that this is due to an excess of acid and water spread throughout the joints, or from injury;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And does not find any pain, but an abscess severe.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes there is a pale and bloody abscess, yellowish in color, often caused by an artery's wound or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from an artery wound, it is known by the hot arrangement of the abscess when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And do not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is caused by vein swelling is known by its expression when touched with the fingers, and can be well incised in this manner and others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And cut the skin of the shin bones, then stretch them out, and the egg-shaped swelling will appear white on its surface, and remove the suspending membrane from all around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already hard with these new growths, then you must extract the egg and cut it;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is air-filled on its surface or inside the vessels, then you must remove all that membrane and cut it cleanly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the origin of the flesh is at the back, you must cut it all away, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are complete, apply linen soaked in rose oil and wine to the wound, then dress it with other dressings until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the boil on the buttocks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a boil, with softening of the kidneys, and if the patient moves they cry out.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this disease is equally frightening as the one mentioned earlier; nonetheless, we will tell you about it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You should have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then place the suspension of the kidneys below their testicles, close to the penis and scrotum, and the master should hold them tautly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut with a sharp, wide-bladed scalpel across the vessels until they are exposed and then scrape each side as we have described in the extraction of arteries from the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert a needle with a doubled thread and tie it at the first spot where the vessel appeared, then tie it again at the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut straight through the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound like others where an arrow is struck, so that none of the vessels fall out from either side.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For otherwise no harm comes of it, and if all the vessels are visible, then you must pull on both sides of the wound for all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the bone does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot heal.
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the nose
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The outcome of this operation is that it results in the sectioning that comes from below, or the extension upwards on the abdomen in the region of the groin, causing the intestines to descend through that opening on one side
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this opening is either below the scrotum or from its extension, and both these methods are caused by many things
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from blows, falls, jumps, carrying heavy loads, and similar causes
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the sign when it is due to the extension of the scrotum is that it happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not come suddenly
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscess is even to its depth because the surgeon presses the intestine
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign when it is a cut in the thigh is that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various visible swellings under the skin, which is due to the leakage of intestines and blood from the wound in the thigh
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	Sometimes the rings are torn along with the intestines, which are retained inside and cause great suffering for the sick person, especially when they are pressed upon
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cases of iron wounds, it is necessary to avoid them
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	The manner of this procedure is that you should instruct the patient to replace the intestine with their hand inside the wound, if it can be reached.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then gently press on its colon between your hands and raise the thighs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch out the heart upwards and cut all the skin from the length of the thighs
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then insert forceps into the hips on each side according to your need to open the wound, so that the bone can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then skin the surgeon so that it is under the skin of the thighs until the white muscle is exposed on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then insert your index fingers into that which supports the thigh, between the white muscle that is beneath the skin of the egg (scrotum), and the second muscle, and separate what lies behind the egg, and between the second muscle
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And then move your right hand into the heart of the kidneys, and stretch your left hand upwards to touch the spleen, and lift the eye towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the assistant to raise the eye upwards, and untie that which is behind the lien.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And search with your two hands if there is any intestine wrapped around or hard spleen, and if you find anything, push it into the abdomen below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle with a thick thread made of silk threads and insert it into the rear part of the spleen, which is after the kidney's skin.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	Afterwards, cut the heads that appear from the threads, until there are four threads remaining;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then tie them together in the form of a cross and tie the spleen, which we have said is below the kidney's skin, with a strong thread in two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the heads of the threads and tie them firmly in two parts so that no vessels that nourish it can enter inside, so that an abscess may not come.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And then place the bandage according to the first bandage's length of two fingers from that one, and after these two bandages leave the sinew that is under the heart of the lungs on the right side.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	And then the rest according to the roundness that the arm carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then cut into the part that is under the skin of the lungs until blood flows and the bowels, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then bring wool moistened in oil and place it on the wounds, and then bring the bandage that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes cauterize the white flesh that we have mentioned after the incision, for fear of bleeding
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	But this happened many times, so leave the bandage until it sticks by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	And if it is slow to stick, then be risen with warm water and place on what we have said until it sticks;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then treat the wound with another cure until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Hernia carnosum
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I never saw anyone daring to perform the cure by iron
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it should be done like the branch that grows with the vine, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting slightly above lightly below;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then cut in mid-air, and treat the boil of he who operates, until the vessels bleed.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes a rupture occurs in angles, as we have said, and the place opens up;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	And none of the intestines descend to the joints, and if any do, it is little, and repair them at all times.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	But if it remains too long in this state, the wound becomes inflamed or gangrenous, so that the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens due to the extension of the gangrene which is at the angles, as we have said, for it extends, then the place becomes softened and swollen and opens up.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And its treatment is by cautery, as we have previously said.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And the patient should lie on their back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture open with a wide incision according to the size of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then remove the sinew that is under the skin which you follow, then take the thread and place it on the visible surface of the sinew.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press deeply into the abdomen, then sew the two visible surfaces of the sinew onto the top of the thread, sewing one and the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the top of the thread, and do not cover any part of the sinew or extend the wound or anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of intestinal rupture.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then treat it with the cure for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse and dress the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is contracted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is more effective at this point and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	Regarding the softening of the skin around the anus
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Often in some men the skin of the scrotum becomes softened because the contents inside are softened to see.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, for the patient to lie on his back, and cut away the softened skin from the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then bring together both lips with one stitch, and if you wish, sew up the excess softened skin with three or four firm stitches.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then cut between the ribs, and heal it like other wounds until it is healed, and then stitch it up.
dou chastrement	Regarding castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that astrologers are condemned in our law, therefore I would like to not speak about them in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	And it is necessary to mention for only two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	One of which is so that the physician may know how to answer when asked and how to treat;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	And the other is because we often have need of castration for certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that castration is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	Either by traction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the first way, which we do by traction, make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and hanging down;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then grasp them with your hand so that they remain in place and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the cautery of burns:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	You must shear the animal, and press its skin with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each boil once when you have well cleaned them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave any boil that is deep and hidden beneath the vessels.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this method of cauterization is better than that done by suction because some substances from the boils may remain through suction, which causes the animal to crave lustfulness.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism exists in two ways among men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One way is that between the two testicles appears also the form of a woman's genitals, with hair and sometimes urine comes out through the foreskin.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, who have on their pubic region both a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for both men and women is that you cut away all the excess skin, and heal it like other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second way, there are men whose urine flows through the foreskin's skin, for whom there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Regarding hemorrhoids：
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tartaric acid is a substance applied to the natural part, so it looks too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary for you to cut off the excess skin of the tenting with scissors, then trim it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then apply the treatment until it is healthy again.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	And there is another substance that arises from the mouth of the uterus, and the womb, and sometimes jumps out, and resembles a cow's udder, and for this reason the ancients called it 'cow-like disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must cut it, as we have said regarding the tenting procedure, and care for it until it is healthy.
de erratique	Of the erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic is when a woman's nature is not pierced, or the opening is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that comes upon it.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is caused by applied flesh, or a thick or thin membrane, and it is formed deeply in the uterus, on the sides, below, or wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And forbids conception, childbirth, and sometimes flowers from being had.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	And the recognition of these is by the gaze of the woman.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling is near the surface, then search with your fingers or a probe.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is close and subtle, and near the two books, then be quick, they are together like this:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Bring your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back with her legs spread.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then open the two books together until the subtle vulva is revealed, and cover the openings.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool, soak it in oil, place it on the location, and let the woman lie on her stomach each day so that it does not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the shoulder blade is hard and thick, you must shave it like a laurel leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the opening is born from flesh, then stretch it with the horn and cut it open;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And have the blood-stopping medicines ready, such as achic, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with an egg.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then prepare a wide leaden funnel so that the wound cannot heal;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	And thus let it be lengthened, and provide him with a linen tent.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then other treatments should be applied until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh comes out in the wound, it must be shaved in this manner, unless it's an inflamed abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the inflamed abscess that is in the wound, one should not apply fire.
des emorroides	**Hemorrhoids:** Hemorrhoids are varicose veins inside or outside the anus; they appear as small lumps like bunches of grapes; some are internal and invisible from without, while others are external; they cause pain when defecating or sitting down; they can cause blood to flow freely during defecation or after, or only stain the toilet paper; sometimes they prolapse and come out at defecation; they are caused by constipation due to a bad diet, heavy lifting, or frequent diarrhea. The cure for them is to avoid their causes: eat healthy food that does not cause constipation, drink plenty of water, exercise regularly, do not lift heavy objects unnecessarily, and use ointments to relieve pain and inflammation. For internal hemorrhoids, surgery may be necessary if they are large or causing significant symptoms. Otherwise, rubber band ligation, sclerotherapy, or infrared coagulation can be used to treat them. For external hemorrhoids, warm sitz baths, witch hazel pads, and over-the-counter creams can provide relief. In severe cases, surgery may be necessary.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that do not normally occur in this way; and when hemorrhoids become old they become hard.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	As we have already said in the division of them, their similitudes and signs; now I will say those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are deeply embedded in the flesh, and are not visible to the touch, then iron treatment is not applicable.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which one can feel, those are the ones that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore you should put the woman in a cold house, then grasp the hemorrhoids with forceps, cut them at their root, and sprinkle powders containing sanguinary-restraining medicines on it, such as achiote and dragon's blood, incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then place her feet in cold water for an hour, then put her in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	And if there is bleeding, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, and similar things; then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and apply this poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if she stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not this, then apply cupping glasses to the back and breasts without piercing.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take linen, dampen it in burdock juice or celandine juice with old wine, and apply to the location.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has softened, then treat the area with ointment until it is clean;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp-pointed head, so it must be covered as I said earlier;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	**Abscesses of the Rectum:** Abscesses of the rectum are localized collections of pus that can develop due to infection or injury to the tissues of the anorectal area. Symptoms may include pain, swelling, redness, warmth, and fever. Treatment typically involves incision and drainage of the abscess under local anesthesia to relieve pressure and allow the pus to drain out. This procedure is usually performed by a surgeon or colorectal specialist. If the abscess is deep-seated or associated with significant inflammation, the patient may require intravenous antibiotics to fight infection and prevent it from spreading. In some cases, a seton (a loop of suture material) may be placed into the abscess cavity to allow for ongoing drainage over time. It's important to note that untreated abscesses can rupture spontaneously, causing severe pain and potentially leading to serious complications such as sepsis or fistula formation. Therefore, prompt medical attention is crucial for proper diagnosis and treatment.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of boils come in the flesh, such as cancer and stone boil, herpes and erysipelas and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot boil, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I must speak of the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not one of those that swell;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you wish to know the work of iron, look whether the abscess is hot at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore, do not rush to pierce it, but let it ripen until the pain is alleviated;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	And then make the patient sit on the seat, and have two small seats where they can recline, and lean them against their back and bring their feet together near the knee.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And let their thighs be spread out, and place their arms beneath their knees, and tie them securely with a good binding;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then have the helper approach from the right side and bring forth the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the mare, the form of which shall follow.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is necessary that when you bring forth this instrument, you first insert the rod to know the depth of the mare's throat, so that what enters thereafter does not go deeper than it should and injure the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the instrument is too large, then cover the depth of the mare's throat with cloths so that the instrument does not cause injury.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is necessary for him to put the funnel of the instrument on top and moisten the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when an abscess opens, and you cut it gently by hand, then it is necessary to cover its head with spathumile lotion.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the bowels are emptied, then you should put into the wound moistened tents in rose oil or green oil set.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And place the tent far from the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and put behind it on the marrow and on the linen cloth moistened with hot water or malted water.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it afterwards for 2 days with appropriate ointment until it is sound.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	And sometimes lift up the marrow and wound by enema of water and honey, then with water in which lily roots and long aristolochia are cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Then reapply the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is located in the marrow, then you must refrain from cauterizing with fire, but treat it as we have said in the section on dislocations.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	The task of the midwife is first to know the form of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing downwards, and she desires to smell the air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	Then the child eagerly desires to come out (into the world).
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	Then know that this birth is according to Nature's form; the head comes out first, followed by the child.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, gently press his belly so that the child may come out quickly
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	For when it settles upon its head, then comes forth the afterbirth with it; and the mother is cleansed of her excesses through proper cleansing.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And any child that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For sometimes it comes out on its feet, with the body or head first, or the hands; or it may come out on its belly, and sometimes it is turned around by chance on its neck or in other harmful positions
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and skillful in these matters, careful to avoid error or deception; and I shall show you all the positions and how one should assist her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes out naturally headfirst and the woman is crying out in pain, but her contractions are weak, then have her sit on a stool or have women hold her up
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	And if the nature of oil or fenugreek has been cooked, then place the small spatula between its teeth, of which here is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	And cut the foreskin, and scrape with its nail until the moisture within flows out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	And take the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then the woman must be given a suppository of ground fenugreek with sesame oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Then make her inhale the powder and sneeze, holding her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	The child will now be born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands come out first, then you must gently push them back in bit by bit;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot be pushed back in, then put the woman on a seat and raise her feet high.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then lower the seat to the ground, taking care that the woman does not fall during this process;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the hands cannot be pushed in and the child is dead, then cut the hands at the joint shown here and extract the child, resetting it correctly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the delivery of a child onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes onto his feet, then you must strike upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn it gently, gently, until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take one of the feet and extend it gently, gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When he jumps up to his knees, then command him to grasp it, and make him sneeze with rue;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If God wills, let him jump forth.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if there is no cautery as we have said, then it should be turned little by little until it matches its natural shape
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it becomes easy
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if he does not come out as we have said, then take musk mallow from the mountain, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind everything together in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	And apply this ointment to the nature of the woman, then have her sit in hot water up to below her ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when she is softened below, put on the woman a girdle of myrrh and place it under her, leaving it for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose closed, and lightly press her belly, for the child will now come out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	"of the child's exit onto its knees"
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When a child comes in this form, then the bailiff puts his hands gently.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	and is hung by the neck, with legs hanging down, lying on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and folds his hands gently, then he takes the hands onto the stomach, and removes the cushions underneath so that it hangs down properly;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, he takes its feet and shakes them violently, then moves his stomach up, then places his hands there;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and takes the child gently;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and tells the woman to hold on until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	"One hand comes out during the birth of the child"
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to devise how to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be brought back, then make the woman get up and go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot go, then make her lie on the bed, and forcefully lift her legs;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the muscle relaxant that I have mentioned.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then study how to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And swaddle the child according to its natural shape, then make it sneeze, and instruct her to lie on her back until the child is freed.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	"At the moment of birth, with its hands spread wide, facing its mother's back."
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the servant take his hand, then slowly turn it little by little, and swaddle it lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is aligned, then place the natural balsamic mixture of mastic and oil on it, as we have said, then instruct her to move it slowly;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and instruct her to lie down;
et la fai esternuer.	And make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	"This same manner is used for the afterbirth."
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes free in this manner from the entire afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your fingernail until all moisture is drained;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child's face and neck are covered in blood, then cut it at the cheek, so that it is not retained, otherwise the child will die;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then place the child inside until you have positioned it correctly, and instruct the woman to lie on her back several times:
adonques si istra legierement.	Then it can be eased gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	"Regarding the birth of twins:"
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are often born, sometimes three or four at a time;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, and it happens occasionally.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are rare, and do not live long, if they have names;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know those that are multiplied, and they are despised by the devil who divides them, which is tied to hunger.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they come out naturally like one whole, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are born crying, the treatment is as we have said, and the midwife should be skilled, and do what she does quickly and easily;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do it in such a way that it leads to health.
de plusors enfans	"Regarding multiple births:"
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the womb two or three or four or five or six or seven, or many up to fifteen, and all of them are perfectly shaped like children according to the measure of God's glory, and it is necessary that the midwife knows all these things, for such things can happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If one does according to what is necessary
de l’enfant mort	Regarding a stillborn child:
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman for a dead child or miscarriage, as I have described in the section on this topic, and it does not expel the fetus, you are constrained to intervene manually
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	Then you must know whether the woman is of sound virtue, and has no illness or fears death
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	Then the woman should be positioned on her back with her head lowered and her legs raised
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the assistant should grasp her thighs, or she should be tied to the bed so that she cannot push during childbirth
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils made from althea and fenugreek and linseed, then anoint your hands with these oils and mucilages
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then gently insert your hands into the womb, then find the place where you can grasp the handles that are suitable for this purpose, and be careful that if the child is in the breech position it does not slip out headfirst
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If he sticks the arrows in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or on his palate or under the beard or in the belly or near the ribs, and if the descent is below feet, stick them or prick them at the middle ribs.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And he must draw the arrow with his right hand, place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and gently push it with all his strength, sticking the arrow into any of these places that we have mentioned, until the object is emptied.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the arrow:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then stick against the other arrow, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are even.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then stretch them evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that they can come out easily, and let the arrows be toothed for better grip, as shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there remains a part of it, then oil some of his fingers with oil and press them on that part, and pull the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If none remains there, then place this poultice higher up, and do so until it completely emits fire.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot return due to constraint, you must wrap it with cloth until it relaxes completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then strike the joint of the sole or the instep, and do likewise for the other foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and its passage narrow, or has a sharp-pointed bone assembled at its forehead, you must place the spatha spine between your two index fingers and cut open the forehead and extract the bone.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or you could round it using the instrument called "almidach", for which the form comes with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And do likewise if the child has naturally a large head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	Then draw out the bones with forceps, and if the head still resists and is constrained by the forceps, cut it until the moisture in the pectoral opening escapes.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces with a knife where you can reach.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	If it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	"And if the child is on its feet, traction will be light, and the alignment of the mouth of the marrow will be easy."
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is stuck in the belly or the breast, then you must pull it out using a cloth wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and cut into the belly or the breast until the moisture that is inside runs out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	And if other bones are broken but the head remains in place, then put your hand deep into the marrow and draw it out until you reach the mouth of the marrow.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then put in a hot poultice or two, and burn it with fire.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	And if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed due to an inflamed ulcer that has come there, then you should not work it open, but rather bring moist and fatty substances
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and use plasters, and make poultices from softening and moistening herbs.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can set it right, then arrange as we have said in the living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If one has no power, then let it flee by pieces; leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if arrangements should come to abscesses that arise in the flesh.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	If blood flows, let it be put into restricted water, and arrange other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	"I saw a woman whose child had been bitten in the abdomen by one mouse, then another mouse came and bit the other."
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	"After many days, an abscess formed on her cheekbone and swelled so much that it opened up, causing great pain."
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	"I was called to treat her, but after thinking about it for some time, I could not heal the wound."
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	"I applied a poultice with strong drawing power and out came one bone, then after a few days another."
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	"I was greatly amazed at this because the abdomen has no bones."
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	"So I thought it must be the bones of a dead fetus."
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I wished the wound to be wide, and pulled out many bones until the woman was much improved;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And the woman lived for a long time like this, and sometimes a little bone would come out.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I recorded this chapter so that when the master finds something unusual, he may know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	"on bringing the hip joint back into place"
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Hereafter comes the form of the compresses, according to which the books are opened;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	And at two turns for each head of the kidneys.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, let the wedge be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And let the mouth of the wood be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees one and a half palms long.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And in the middle let there be two joints of this same wood, which are closed on one and open on the other, half a palm long or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these two joints are placed in the mouth of the mallet to open it when one turns the two wedges.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood wood, according to the shape of the tweezers.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	And it has at each end two joints, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	And when you wish to open the mallet with all the equipment, make the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging down and her legs spread wide apart, then insert the two joints joined together into the mallet, and hold the head of the equipment under her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then open your hand to the instrument, just as you did with the pliers evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the mortar, until the pestle does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	This tool is all equal, and their appearances are multiplied;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the master has prepared them, the quicker the work is done, and the higher it rises among people for its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	"Therefore do not disregard the instrument until you have prepared it, for its usefulness is not negligible."
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second twin is retained during childbirth, you must command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze with condition, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she sneezes because of it, all is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then take the pot, and make a hole in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mortar, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cumin, and centory;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then place a tube through the hole of the pot, with the other end in the mouth of the person sick, and hold it thus until the vapors enter the person;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then cause them to sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	"If the midwife acts quickly,"
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment and is not extinguished, command the maiden to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in gum arabic, then place it on the navel and rub the second bellybutton.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she has found it, grasp it and stretch it little by little straight out, so that the person does not fall during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But one must move it gently to the right and left, then pull it out.
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes out and becomes disconnected.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the person's mouth is narrow, we have given the treatment of sneezing and herb fumigation;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it is not as we have said, then guard that you do not err in bleeding.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the uterus, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then perform a vaginal irrigation with a tetrafarmacon ointment.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	Then she will swell and revert, and come back stronger.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	But nonetheless, when it swells and there comes a bad smell to the stomach and head, then it wounds the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Therefore, fume incense suitable for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	A number of the ancients have tested fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	"The shape of the instrument used for fumigation of the woman during childbirth and delivery is as follows:"
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is similar in appearance to a dog's tail, and one places the fine point on the nature, and the wide heads over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let the fumigation be over the charcoal embers until it is exhausted, then begin another.
de percier lou fondement	"to pierce the anus"
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born whose anus is not pierced but obstructed by some small membrane:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it must then be, that the maid shall prick him with a needle at his hand, and not with a sharp point, she should clean the thread first so as not to touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place damp linen soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply the salve until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	"And if you suspect that it has not healed, insert a silver tube into the hole and leave it there for several days. It should be removed when the child is ready to go to its room."
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this swelling arises suddenly from a wound or abscess.
si covient coper celui soudement:	If that suddenness must be covered:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	As we have said about the burn of boiling water.
de la fistule dou fondement	"of a fistula of the anus"
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that arise beneath the fundament are nodular, and growths that arise near the fundament or in the space between the two buttocks indicate the presence of one fistula or more.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when this nodulation is ancient and opens up, it oozes moist white pus or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are recognized by the fact that fluid or wind comes out during evacuation when the patient defecates, and sometimes a worm jumps out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And there are fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they reach as far as the hip joint, and as high as the nape of the neck.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes a fistula piercing into the fundament, but not piercing:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you place your two index fingers on the fundament, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twists, then insert a thin reed or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the reed or hair with your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and nothing comes out of the hole except wind or vapor, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not pierce.
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure [it].
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	"And when a fistula extends all the way to the bladder or the urethra, urine flows out of it and cannot be stopped with medications."
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced as far as the hip joint, then the reed coming from there reaches the place:
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting and the pain does not spread around, then it has left suddenly, and medication or salves are of no avail.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	In these Persian fistulas there is no other cure but labor, and foolishness of those physicians who meddle with them in vain.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	For that which is not Persian and not ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have proven, and it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back between your hands.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And lift up his legs until his thighs are level with his belly
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then place an iron tent on it, or lead if there is twisting, until you know where the tent enters.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your two index fingers there, until you sense that the tent has pierced.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And when you feel between your fingers the sinew or flesh, know then that it is Persian.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If one does not work at it, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said everywhere that some can indeed be healed well, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that one does there, it is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it was said earlier;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and insert it hot into the fistula until it reaches the base;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times until you know that these broken parts have been burnt off, which resemble the feather of a bird;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then rinse with damp cloths until that charred part comes off, and then apply an ointment between the skin and the wound to heal it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is healed thus, all the better.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this cannot be healed otherwise;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent enters but does not pierce all the way to the bone that is at the base, and between your two fingers and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or fat, and you see the fistula through the covering on the heart side;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If at the start of the fistula, you grab and pull forward the skin, then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the tip of the skin.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the skin will be relieved, and it will fall off;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then scrape away those faulty parts that resemble a bird's feather, leaving none behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	"If the skin becomes inflamed, and cracks between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or strong medicine."
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery accomplishes two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of those attached parts, and the staunching of blood and the drying out of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment for moist skin sores with hot ashes or crushed substances until the wound gapes wide open, and the burned skin can be pulled out from the wound;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound with solid oils that penetrate deep into the flesh, and these are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	"For when it is thus restored, it will be healed and not return again."
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	"And if the fistula comes right up from the fundament but is distant from the body, push your thumb into the fundament and feel with it."
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel that the skin is about to burst between two stitches or sutures or flesh, where there is great danger and hope, then administer one of three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	When you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to the bottom, if you can then apply dressings and heal it as first.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not go too deep that you cut the tissue holding the fundament, and cause unwanted discharge.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then heal it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	Perhaps then it will be healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it after it has been cut near the fundament, either with a dressing or with some other pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then cleanse the faulty flesh in the wound as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then strive to restore the wound and ensure the fistula remains towards the front of the fundament
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	so that it will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes fistulas are formed in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you insert the dressing into the fistula and it is on the side of the fundament near the skin above, then take a pointed dressing shaped like this:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	"And thread two turns of thread onto it, then insert the tent all the way down to its tip into the fistula."
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it pierces through to the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that hole, in such a way as you would push your finger into the foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	And pull out the head of the thread, and bring together the two heads, and tie one to the other, leaving it for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And bind it several times until the threads break those excesses that are between them.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then dress the wound until it is healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	"If the fistula does not open on its own, then make an incision in any way that you can, if it is not too deep."
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"For one should not cut too deeply for the sake of making a hole and then dress it as we have described until it is healed."
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spatula used for opening a fistula should be narrow, pointed, and cutting-edge;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other side not so, because one should not break what one should not break, as you see here:
des emorroydes	"hemorrhoids"
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Haemorrhoids are of two kinds
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Either they are inside the fundament like grains of resin and are small or large in size; there is blood present on their surface at all times, and there may be one or several, they deform the fundament and its head
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those which are displaced have little moisture, often containing a bit of yellow citrine or a bit of blood, and they have the color of flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those which are in the fundament, so it is that you command the patient to strain while walking around rooms, until the fundament is released, and they become visible.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	So hurry, and take it with tongs or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the tweezers cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	Then pull them out with your thumbs, then cut them off, and sprinkle warm powders on them in place of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the fundament cannot be released, then administer a bitter and sharp enema to wash out whatever is in the fundament so that it can be released openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If the patient grabs [it], and if the hairs are burned at their base, then the treatment is easy.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And you should grasp them with your nail or with forceps, cut them off, then cauterize them as we have said, until they are clean and the patient fears cutting by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If you must arrange stitching in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread, insert it into a needle, then draw the thread up and pierce the needle from the other side, turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and thus make it wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And draw the thread tautly, then tie the knot, remove the needle, and do so for all others, leaving one for checking excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place on the wound a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and cover it, instructing the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And leave it thus until they fall off, and when they have fallen off, treat them with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	"on the drying of fistulas in the fundament"
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	"Sometimes there is a drying up of fistulas in the intestines due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine no longer helps;"
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you must scrape off with a scalpel's tip or your nail the scab above it that moisture does not remain.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then dress it until it becomes firm as is fitting;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot become firm, then resume scraping more forcefully than before, until much blood flows and the flesh is scraped raw.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then dress it until it becomes clean.
dou fremit	fever
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Formice (formication) is a small apparition that occurs before the body and goes very deep;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it finds the limbs cold, with a sensation like deathly trembling, spreading throughout the whole body, especially in the hands more than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a quill from an eagle's wing or a strong owl's feather, and place this feather on the trembling spot until the circle formed around it becomes red.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then twist your hand around the entire feather until you encompass the trembling spot completely and drive it deep within, crushing its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	"And if you see this, do so with a cane of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and pointed above:"
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Does not pierce, to keep movement steady, and presses on the two sides.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, cauterize around the trembling, as it is written in the chapter of cauteries
de la forme dou clistere	"of the form of the enema"
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes, one performs an enema with silver or lead, or molten brass or copper;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and sometimes these instruments are made small and large according to those for whom they are intended.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	"Therefore, those that should be used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small."
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	"The form of the small and large enema is as follows, where the belly is tied according to this manner:"
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is a constriction or the belly is bound up, as you see, and the bowels are pierced within;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and on one side there are two holes, and on the other one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And the belly should be filled with medicines in a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be one finger's width of space, then insert strong threads of coarse yarn twisted in an X shape or wound around, and gather up the belly like a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument beforehand with a strong thread, then cauterize.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the end of the cautery with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the minister presses with both hands together until it is all flat, then extracts the cautery, and the patient raises their legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it come as much as it can;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if he spends a night entirely undisturbed, it is greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you perform an enema on someone with diarrhea and the medication comes out quickly, then start it again until it is finished."
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or in an abscess, let the cautery be as fine as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And this is the shape of the fine cautery on which the skin should be stretched:
des plaies	"wounds."
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	I shall tell you the treatments for hands and medicines according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to where the wounds are made, and what they are made from."
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by striking with stone, cutting with sword and knife or lance, club or arrow, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or wounds made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, head, thigh, belly, liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple head wounds, as memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it was caused by striking with stone or similar things, and if the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, then you greatly doubt the formation of a hot abscess
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	then quickly wash it with cold water from the head itself if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the washing be contrary to the direction of the wound;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And when the patient has emptied themselves of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to fast, then let his food be made smaller, and let him drink no wine nor eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and place upon the wound, if an abscess forms, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no hot abscess, then place over the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood and not moved by air, powder which I will describe later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the air has moved it, then place on it some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	"And if the wound is large, like a cut from a sword or similar objects, and the lips cannot be brought together by force, then bring them together by stitching, as I will tell you about in the treatment of abdominal wounds."
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to the bone and gaping, and hangs only by a little, cut it off;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then heal the wound with medicines, and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and order the patient to eat heavy foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also poultry and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rottenness on the hide, but it hasn't reached the bone, cut away all the rotted part, and burn it with fire, then treat (the wound).
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that does not stop bleeding without a bandage, and it cannot be staunched by medications, then seek the artery; and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help at all, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you put in this powder which seals before the wound moves.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the way to make the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	Take incense one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	Dragon's blood two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	Grind it finely and fill the wound, and bind it tightly until it adheres well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	And then tie it securely, and leave it unbound unless it swells.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Because one does not remove medicine until it is healthy again.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	"Sometimes this can also be done with quicklime alone when incense and dragon's blood are not available, but only if the air has not moved the wound."
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has moved, especially in summer, do not apply this powder to it
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	Instead, apply some digested oils or poultices made from barley flour and water and honey until it softens
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with other treatments until it is healed
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone fracture accompanies the wound and it is small, remove it with fine forceps
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	I will tell you about head fractures later
de la plaie dou col	"Of the wound on the neck"
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	"If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, except when the nerve of the neck or an artery is cut."
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave them alone and not apply anything constricting, for they harm the nerves and cause them to retreat
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But let the medicine be warm, such as warm water mixed with honey and rose oil, and cooked in soft water, and other mineral stones according to this method, and moist poultices
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the wound is large, then stitch it up with thread and bind it with bandages until it heals."
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if wounds are deep and full of bowels, pierce it below or lower.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	If the artery is cut, and blood flows copiously, tie it off, ligate it, and cauterize it if necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If the spine of the neck or heart is cut, and the vessels are preserved through which blood flows, then sew the heart to the windpipe, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind it tightly and leave it for a few days, then treat it with healing ointments until it is completely healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	If the wound has impressed upon the bone, scrape it away.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	If there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can; those that you cannot have, let the wound fester and drain, then ligate the opening.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	"And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, cure it as I have said in its chapter."
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	"Regarding wounds from spears or daggers,"
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then observe whether wind enters the wound whenever the patient breathes.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	you will know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep and the blood is fresh throughout, do not apply powder to it at first nor bind it tightly lest the blood retreat inwardly toward the heart and kill the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but apply an attractive ointment to it, binding it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to suck out moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	Otherwise, no spasm will come nor harmful trembling of the heart will occur;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good signs, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it with compresses and other treatments until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	And if it cannot heal nor open, know that there is a fistula present.
si la cure si com on doit.	If the treatment is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and is simple, or worse on the back, then treat that which is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If it is large, stitch it.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	And if it is small, powder it, and if it is close to the bone and has cut pieces, then search the wound, and treat the edges if they are separated.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not separated, then let the wound suppurate, so that the extraction will be easier.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	"Regarding rupture of the abdomen"
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the abdomen is great, medium, and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From a large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerve of the intestines leap out, which causes their intrusion.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because it is harder to push the intestines back in unless they are put back piece by piece.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, drawing in more points, and therefore it is worth moving the wound, so that one can reset the intestines to their place along with the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that there are four ways to perform an abdominal incision:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common sutures occur in the abdomen suture, and the suture of other wounds on the body has two more common sutures that are shared by other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	However, these sutures are most suitable for the abdomen, and I will describe each one and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestines has been exposed, and there is no need for anything else, it should be done in one of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Moisten an sponge or the soft cloth in boiling water alone, or cook in water with vinegar and cumin and spices, and rinse the intestines until the swelling is gone;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And sometimes doing this wine constricting, it is useful to wash wounds for reducing inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling diminish, then moisten the intestines with water or ale and malt, for by this means the entrance is eased somewhat;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with the instrument used to tie off hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	And the first treatment is useful that the surgeon, that no one should cut without great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the instrument for splitting it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	So cut inside in the curve and do not deviate, and see here the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude outwards, then put them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power, for this is useful.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and it is in the lower part under the belly, then you must make the patient lie on their back and place their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	And if it is in the lower abdomen part, raise the head and breast higher than the lower parts; similarly, if the intestine rupture is on one of the two sides, place attention so that the wounded part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus you must arrange what I say for both large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	In small wounds, put on what you are equipped with, then place your hands gently around the wound and draw together its lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common manner of suturing: take one or more needles according to the size of the wound's width, then leave two spaces from the wound's beginning, and insert a needle with good strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	And pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the sinew which is beneath the skin inside, until you have pierced it on that side, and bring together the two ends of the sinew in four places.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then tie a doubled thread around the needle of two parts, then bring together the two heads of the wound gently, and then leave two spaces apart, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie the thread knot as you did with the first needle, and continue doing so according to how many needles you need until the entire wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and coarse; for too fine needles cut all the flesh, and too thick ones cannot enter properly.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore they must be of medium size.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	And do not push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and reopen the wound before it can heal.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	Then cut the heads of the needles so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and place small bandages or dressings on the needle heads to keep them in place until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, where one or two needles suffice.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common; you should bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the flesh with one needle having a medium-strength thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And once you have pierced these edges all together with the needle, then bring the needle back to the beginning of the stitch, in the manner one sews cloth.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	Space each stitch apart by the thickness of a barleycorn;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch saves lives; I once sewed a wound in the belly of a man who was stabbed with a knife. The wound was over a palm's length wide and the bowels protruded by two palms' lengths.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I reset the intestines for him after he had been feverish for 24 hours, and the wound healed up to the 15th day, which I cleaned, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physicians had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	I did not treat him with ointments because there were none available in the place where I was.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	Apply cotton wool twice a day to the wound and rinse it with honey water until it is clean.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and insert it from the outer part to the inner one;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the flesh straight through, then attach the head of the thread or the skin where you have inserted the needle, and make it pierce elsewhere from inside out;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the purpose of this suture is that you should sew like a tanner sews leather, leaving the thread once on one side and taking it up again on the other until the entire suture is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of suturing, which Galen considers proper, is this: some people join the two parts naturally together and apply one end of the thread to the other in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Stick a needle near the head of the liver, and pierce that spot alone, leaving both ends of the spleen untouched.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then twist the needle and make it pierce from the outer part inward toward the spleen's two heads.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce both of them from the outer part inward toward the liver's two other heads that are on the opposite side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the usual way to cauterize and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	According to Galen, it is said that one should sew up the belly with two needles, each having thread on it.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one needle should be inserted from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who stitch hides.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Know that when the intestine is inside the belly, the stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of this wound is like the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	And it is necessary that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the art has moved it, then put back the intestine and sew up the cut.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	Then place powder around the flesh, and if the wound has moved, apply some ointment that is available, until the wound bows.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And draw the thread tight, and let the lips of the wound be sewn together, and the skin.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound like the others until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have medicine, then apply old cotton as soon as the wound begins to ooze, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For in many cases where wounds are simple, no other medicine is needed;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound will not communicate with the main limbs, it is necessary to wet light linen in warm oil of roses or rose oil, and place it around the angles and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If he feels pain or corruption in his bowels, and this happens often, then perform black wine enemas. Moreover, if the corruption reaches the intestines,
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And if it pierces inside, know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines called "jejunum" cannot heal when wounded due to the thinness of their vessels and the delicacy of the entire body, as well as its similarity in nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	If the worm jumps out of the wound, push it back in like the intestines while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and has become worms or black, then tie the place that is black so that no blood flows there, because there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut what is between the tie, and put two heads of a knife dangling from the part below the wound until it reaches out to aid in extracting when the worms fall, and the wound opens.
de la routure dou boueil	from dislocation of the eyeball
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some people; for example, I saw a man pierced in the belly with a spear,
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it was invaded and became a fistula, and excretion and wind escaped through it.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to probe until it was clean, and the area bound up.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient might have some ailment in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	But there was no illness, he remained in better condition, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And some experts said that when one has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take large leeches, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the leech has opened its mouth, place it on both lips so that it sucks there;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	And then cut off its head, and this holds so that it cannot detach itself, then place another leech afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely covered.
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If such a stone enters the intestines and causes no harm to the patient, then one can tie the intestines with a fine thread made from the gut of an animal, like this:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this gut thread that is well scraped, and then tie at the head of this gut a thin twisted linen thread; then put the thread through the needle and stitch the intestine, and reset it in its place.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of sewing with threads is not used except according to the way of trust and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, then there is no device nor health except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	"of fistula wherever it may be"
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know this: any wound or abscess that becomes hollow is universally called a 'fistula,' and likewise when it swells and contracts.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to truth a hard and white node that is not painful, and it is also shaped like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes in clear jump bow, and other times thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes small, and other times enough.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not clean and has no flesh, only appears as one of the nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	That is to say, by the smallness of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	Or because of its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that does not allow flesh to grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or where there is too much bow.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Or where the place is porous, and the matter is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Or where the medicine used in the treatment is not good;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	Or because the corruption is a type of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Or because the property in the region has delayed digestion and delayed healing, and is naturally inflamed.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Or where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medicinal remedies in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	"Now I must tell you about the treatment of fistula which is done by manual work."
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from large veins and arteries, and nerves, either in the face or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or near some of the ribs, or in the spinal cord of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and some come to the property of the main member and similar places
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that are of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I have mentioned, and you are confident about its cure and recognize it, then take a tent of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, and seek it
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the fistula is twisted, search for it with a subtle tent of lead, for lead bends more around the twist
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the fistula has many holes and you cannot search it well by touches, then cleanse it through one of the holes, for moisture flows quickly from one hole to another, and cleanses it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then search for blood as much as you can, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and how deep it is. Ask the patient well about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And once you truly know where it is, and if it's far from a joint, or nerve, artery, vein, or in any of the places I've told you, then cut according to what I've said. Remove the furthest layer and the rotten flesh that is inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	Then treat it until it is healed. And if the fistula is very deep in its proper place, then cut as deeply as you can. Then put moistened cloths soaked in hot water and vinegar at the mouth of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I place compresses of healthy flesh until it is healed
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it does not heal by this method, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If vein or nerve does not trouble you in the main limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then wash until all corruption is removed, then dress with compresses of healthy flesh until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it does not heal, and returns again as before, know that you have not yet reached the source:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	So uncover and search until you reach the bottom, remove all corruption, then replace it in its proper place.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is healed thus, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep to reach.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	So there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is a small broken bone, and you can grasp it with tongs, then remove it using the appropriate tool; but if there are many bones, pull them all out together, leaving none behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, then cut away the moisture and flesh, and expose the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place something irritating to corruption on the wound, and let it remain until the surrounding flesh is corrupted; and then the bones will come out more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it's a large bone, like those of the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackness is gone; then dress the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is much corruption, and it reaches even to the bone,
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	So it must be cut away entirely down to the corruption, then treated until it heals solid.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a fistula which happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	A young man of about 30 years suffered pain in his leg due to an internal cause that brought matter into the limb, causing a large swelling without apparent reason for opening.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	Yet the physicians, through their foolishness, operated so much on the swelling that it opened, and there flowed out much matter, becoming a fistula with many openings that poured forth wind and moisture from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And many physicians tried to treat it for about two years, but none were skilled in the art of hands, so I was called and saw his leg and the remedies with which they had treated him, and what flowed out through the openings was great.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And the young man's body became red, and he had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then sought all the holes, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I therefore hurried and cut into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, which was decayed and perforated, and corruption had reached the bone within.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw what appeared to me of the decayed bone, and thought that there was no other decay besides that which I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And I began to heal the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but it would not close.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	Then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found that the decay had continued in the bone, which I scraped out, and then removed it, and tried to close the space.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But even so, I could not close more than half a palm's width of the bone, and scraped it away entirely, then restored it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it was soon healed and closed, but there was still no need to resume the operation except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and out of fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because often blood was evacuated, but he became entirely healthy, and in place of the bone, hard flesh grew, and it was of good condition and had no harm or opposite at all, neither in going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take the lien, and stretch it over the head of the bone that opens, and command him to extend it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And place another lien of thick linen over the first lien, and tie it above the flesh that is over the bone; stretch the head so that you pull out the corrupted flesh below, and uncover the flesh on the spot where you wish to perform the cautery, so that the heat does not blister the flesh.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And place a truss or a spoon underneath the bone to move away the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And it should be done until one can see and feel the corruption, and then once again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or on one side; uncover all the flesh.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then place a truss underneath, and then cauterize from one side of the corruption to the other; the length of the cautery should be equal to the length of the corruption as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, even the bone that contains it on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if corruption is between two joints, there is no other option but to cut.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if corruption is at the wrist of the hand or foot, it is very serious, but nonetheless you must examine this corruption and how it appears.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And cleanse it in every way that you can, but avoid cutting veins or nerves.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And know that the blades and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their length and shortness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And therefore one must prepare an appropriate tool for each type of operation.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And know that the work will show you which tool you need, according to your knowledge of this art and the evidence of the disease's nature;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you consider the instrument with which you have need according to what is necessary.
dou feu	"from fire"
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head rots either due to an internal cause or a lack of force;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated that corruption with medicines but they do not help, then it is necessary to cut off the limb up to where the corruption reaches so that the patient escapes death or the greater harm of the loss of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the sign is that the limb becomes black as if burned by fire, and afterwards the corruption spreads from limb to limb, and then it takes over the whole body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	So hurry to cut off, and if it is due to the sting of venomous beasts like the sea scorpion or snake etc., if the corruption reaches the elbow joint then cut it off but do not allow it to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes to the hand, cut it at the joint so that the corruption does not come to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	And if it comes to the arm, then cut at the elbow;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And if it passes the elbow, it's death, and there is no benefit in applying external remedies however great their virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	And likewise when corruption comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes to the first joint, cut after the next joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, cut off the whole foot.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it ascends into the leg, cut at the knee joint
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it reaches above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And the manner of cutting off or cauterizing the limb is thus: you tie it above and below, and stretch one servant downwards from one tie, and another upwards from the other tie; and cut open the flesh that lies between the two ties with a broad spatula until the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then cut or cauterize it, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the cautery does not touch the healthy flesh, and the patient receives no other injury or abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding begins when you operate, then cauterize the location promptly, where you apply some constricting powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your treatment until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I shall tell you what happened in Rome once:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	A blackness appeared on him that seemed burned by fire, and this corruption first came upon his right foot, spreading to consume the whole foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the man saw the corruption, he quickly covered his foot, and it was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And many years later the corruption returned to his left hand, and he came to me; after cleansing his body I applied caustic substances, but still the corrosion could not stop.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And it seemed that I should cut off his hand, but I did not want to do so, having hope that we might drive out the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	And I also doubted whether if I cut his hand he would die, for the virtue of the man was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And he despaired entirely and returned to his land, and hastened to have his hand amputated, and he became healthy.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I only recount this so that others may know how to act if such need arises.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess forms in the flesh and stays so long that it collects a great mass of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then it becomes red and bursts open, and the pus jumps out, and the spot remains empty like an empty vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin above it is as thin as stretched fabric, and it does not extend to the bone or the nerve, and such a disease is called "sound," and is not called "fistula.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it extends so far that it reaches the bone deeply, then it is called a "fistula
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And it is fitting for you to cut that skin all around, especially if it is thin, just like a piece of cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and let it not be worried about its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you believe that the skin may decay and corruption is not deep, but the skin is thick with flesh, then perform a clyster thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the breast is large and the belly that it enters has a foul odor, then perform a clyster with Egyptian medicine made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take equal amounts of aloe and oil, and litharge, and cook them together in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes red and thick like honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take as much of it as you need, and mix it with water or honey, and administer it through a clyster, closing the hole tightly.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine remain there for two hours, then remove it by squeezing gently.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until the breast is bandaged and the pus is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and sometimes you should use a warm water enema made from vine ash, especially when this medicine is not present; you should take ashes of burnt grapevine wood and pour boiling water over them, then sift it and use it as an enema until you know that the breast is well cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water made from ashes, then use a warm water and honey enema with a bit of powdered lead.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	Or you can use an enema made from honey and mixed wine, so that the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the blood thin.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And once you have done this and you are confident that the breast is well cleansed, then use an enema made from a substance that causes flesh to grow there; take diaphoretic plaster and mix it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	When you apply the enema of certain medications and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned when discussing ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the opening of the anus is small and the tube of the enema cannot enter it, then widen it a little with an iron tool, and insert a wick of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened enough.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too wide, then leave only enough skin to allow the enema tube to enter, and if the opening of the bowels that excrete faces is above, cut it lower or at its current level.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the intestines are deep within, leave flesh behind there.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot reach the bottom of the wound as you wish, then prepare it in such a way that the intestines lie at their lowest point, for when the intestines are deep within, leave flesh behind there. And if you cannot reach the bottom of the wound as you wish
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	If the bow moves too easily downward, do not leave anything on the bowstring.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	Take medicines that solidify to apply on the skin, and press them with a linen cloth covering the whole wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then cut as deeply as possible around the hole in the skin about an inch wide; then apply a gentle ointment on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound to relieve the bowstring's tension. Do not remove the outer large cloth until after many days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	The one on the wound's hole should often remove it to remove the bowstring, and know what flows from the bowstring whether it is venomous or little or much, digested or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And watch out if the patient feels pain or numbness, and if there is an abscess or not. When your medicine has spread in this way and you see what comes out of the wound's hole, then know that the chest is already healed, and approach the healing.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then you loosen it in the morning or on the third day, and when you open the wound, change the other bandage and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if after many days the breast continues to secrete undigested milk, know that the breast is not healing.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair of health, for recovery is near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people whose wounds heal slowly with flesh, and others who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if undigested food jumps from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach is not empty;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	And if the stomach is slow to empty and is distant, apply drying medicines in substance and power, such as diaphoretic ointments, for there is much vitriol in them, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take diaphoretic ointment, and it is made with rose oil, and rose petals equal in weight;
puis le confit et en use;	Then mix it together and use it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And if diaphoretic ointment is not present, you can also make it better by cooking honey and increasing its size, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, and powder them onto the honey while it is on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And then apply a bandage made of drapery; let it lie upon the breast, and sometimes administer a long aristolochia, and roots of blue lily, which is also like flour of barley and centory.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	And in using simples or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Grind them and make powder, and put upon the honey that I have mentioned, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the wound is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment, know that corruption has gone deep, causing impression on the bone, or in hard members, or in ligaments.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If it is the cure for a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the boil of the toe
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the little finger of the hand or foot, or sometimes arises in other toes.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it is elderly and not cared for, then a hot abscess comes, and they run and tear so much that they reach the root of the nail, sometimes tearing it all.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Rust spreads to the bone, causing foul-smelling pain; the skin becomes doubly wide, and turns yellowish.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If you treat it as we have said in the section above and yet the treatment does not help, then you must cut away with iron all the excess that remains of the nail, after which cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is greatly beneficial if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the nail presses into the flesh and begins to prick and cause a blister, you must place the point of a knife under the nail that is piercing the flesh, lift it up, and carefully scrape away the affected skin, then apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove all [of the affliction].
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply dressings until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	If the corruption has reached the bone, cut it away and burn it out, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, healing cannot occur;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see that both [joints] are corrupting, cut them off with a knife as was mentioned earlier, then treat them until they are healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	If he is struck, bruised, and feels great pain, then you must clean it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the nail of the big toe in a crosswise direction and make sure that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, as this would cause great pain to the patient;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, then put something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of gout in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Some people are sometimes born with both hands completely fleshy, and sometimes there is bone in them, and sometimes there is a nail, and some are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in certain fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those born with a bent little toe do not move, and those born at the joint of the little toe may move occasionally;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The cut in those that are fleshy is easy, as follows:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it off at its root with a broad knife.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those born at the root of the joint are difficult to treat;
si te tien dou coper.	So hold while cutting.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one who is born deaf or becomes deaf later on, you should first cut the flesh around the bone all the way to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and then polish it until it is smooth.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sinews that come together at the two joints come by birth, or by the union of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	You must cut off that swelling so that the little toes return to their natural shape;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two bandages or moistened cloths soaked in rose oil so they do not swell again;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Place two thin pieces of lead between them until the joint is soundly fixed.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If swelling occurs on either side with the palm, scrape away this scurf as needed.
des vils	(of villains)
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The veins are large, engorged tubes full of melancholic impurities that come from various parts of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And this happens more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you should administer to him a laxative for the colon, and then the holy water of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	There are two ways to perform the iron cure:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One is by pricking it with a cautery and drawing out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The other way is to raise the vein and draw all of its blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision should be made in this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, wash the leg with hot water very thoroughly until the thick blood is thinned out, then press the leg of the patient from above the hip down to just below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then make one incision in the vein where it is most prominent, using a wide cut, then squeeze and draw out as much of the black blood by hand from one end to the other until the patient can no longer tolerate it;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then the ulcer, command him to anoint with fats from the innards of a black pig;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And recommence evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, harming the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The raising of him is in this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Rise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then place it in a bath, and raise the leg with warm water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, heat it by fire, and then cut at the vein near the long tendon at the top of the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin with an awl, and strip the vein from each side until it becomes visible when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it appears like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	Then place the tweezers beneath it until it is lifted from the skin, and then cut it lightly with an awl, then cut in another place three inches further.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it up with a razor, as you have done, and press it onto another sinew, as you had done first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then cut another incision, or several if needed, then lift it and cut at the two sides of the foot, then draw it out and lift up to the second incision.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract it from incision to incision until it all comes out, then cut it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then insert a needle with strong doubled thread, tie it and draw it out, place it under the skin, and twist your hand back and forth until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure it doesn't cut, because if it cuts, you cannot draw it out or lift it, which causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have completely treated it, then place wet wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the wound site;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep treating him until he is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	If the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped around itself, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not sever it completely.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron tool used to cut a vein is curved, and it does not sever the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And its curve should be large, because if it were thin, it would cut into the vein; but it should be thick as we have said. Here is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein runs through the legs, in warm regions where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land with no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And sometimes it may appear elsewhere than on the legs, such as when rot occurs under the skin, like how worms and leeches move between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that there comes a very great inflammation in the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to protrude outward like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the vein opens, you must wrap a piece of lead around it, from one and a half to two fingers wide, and tie it; leave the lead hanging on the leg. Every time blood flows out, wrap the lead around it and tie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a portion of it, wrap up the remaining part, but do not cut it at its root so that it remains intact.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut it, it will enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and rottenness in that place, and evil disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	So therefore it must be treated little by little until its end, and nothing of it should remain on the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And sometimes this vein can be treated with the palms of the hands, measuring 12 or 18 inches, and a man once came to me whose had measured 18 inches long; but when you cut it, insert an iron rod into its opening, pierce it right through until all is out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And let the matter that is inside be emptied, and apply healing medicines at the place every few days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and there are many openings from which blood flows;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Treat it then as we have said earlier.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land 'cattle disease', because it often happens to oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, which travels throughout the body moving up and down; one feels it well when it goes from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and leaves behind.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And is caused by putrefaction of certain humours, such as worms, serpents, and roundworms and ascarids in the belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	And there is doubt about its severity, for when it travels through the body and reaches the head, sometimes it enters the eye and destroys it.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	This happens frequently.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being treated or pulled out, one can only do so when it is moving:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	Therefore, tie the place above and below with a strong, tight bandage, then cut it open and pull out the worm; if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, cauterize the area with fire until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greatest harm that it causes is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it coming near the head of the eye, press down firmly under the eyebrow, then cut across, and cauterize.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And the patient should use cleansing of body with dissolving medicines for harmful humors, and avoid eating rotten foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From pain caused by windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called in our land 'vakkhir', and it is a pain that comes to certain limbs, which then moves from limb to limb;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And I have seen what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	And shortly afterward, it moved like a worm up to the shoulder faster than anything else, just as quicksilver moves from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain then left that spot and lodged in the shoulder, and afterward it quickly spread throughout the body until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that she would turn around again around her body as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	"I was greatly amazed at how she moved from limb to limb in this way, for I had never seen this disease manifest itself like this before."
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I had wanted many times before that she might want to move from one place to another without pain, but I had not seen this in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and visible veins, and therefore this constrained windiness appeared;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and there is no apparent reason for this in those who are delicate and have moist bodies and concealed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain which we have described, then quickly apply plaster above and below it, and then cut until that constrained windiness escapes its place;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the location;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	If you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it with remedies that expel windiness, such as fetid pills and pills of senna, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	"The causes of hiccups are varied according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they occur."
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The varieties of them are such that there are those which have large points, and small ones, hairy and smooth.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And there are some with two angles, others with lengths, and still others in fragments.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	And those that fall onto any limb do so in one of two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Either it falls on principal limbs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls into any location on these limbs, the signs of death that I will tell you about appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	So you should beware of extracting this arrow, for afterwards many deaths occur.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And if this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of an arrow striking the brain is when it pierces the bone and bursts the fontanelle above the brain; this includes sudden and severe headache, dimming of vision with redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms, loss of consciousness, vomiting of bile,
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	And perhaps without force from the nostrils, or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And perhaps loses speech and voice
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And there may be moist white discharge like poultry's blood, which also burns like raw flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	Should this sign appear to you, take care, and remove the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of an arrow hitting the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And perhaps the arrow moves like poultry, and black blood comes out, accompanied by coldness and cold sweat, and fainting;
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Then you may be sure that the man will die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	"The sign of hiccups that occur near the lung is when foamless sputum suddenly comes from the wound; the throat swells up and the patient changes color, sighs loudly, and seeks cold air."
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow hits the lung's covering, it is near the ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and causes great pain and sorrowful sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and all the shoulder joints move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	"And if hiccups occur in the stomach, sometimes undigested meat comes out from the wound."
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	"And if hiccups occur in the belly and blood flows through the intestines suddenly, there is no hope of recovery or extraction of the hiccup."
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow hits the bladder, urine comes out and there is defecation, and the patient feels intense pain;
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that wounds are deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	"Other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary muscles, spinal column, buttocks, thighs, and legs, etc., are safe according to many conditions."
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	"When hiccups occur in a nerve or artery and are not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do the same."
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened at a man's house where an arrow fell into the root of his nose
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it and drew it out on the other side under the ear's fat without causing harm
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And at another time I drew out an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye under its lid, and the arrow was barbed so that only its tip could be reached towards the wood, and it was large like a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The wound healed without any bad consequences.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian; the arrow was Arab, with ears;
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I cut the barbs and teased it out until I drew it out, and the Christian healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And drew out an arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly, thinking that he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	And then, after passing thirty days, his condition did not change.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut on the arrow, pierced it, and pulled it out with fire; there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man onto whom an arrow has fallen on his back, and the wound is closed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remained within him, and did not change its natural state nor cause harm to any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man onto whom an arrow fell on his face, and the wound was closed;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and remained thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	And many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And pulled out an arrow from the neck of one of the king's servants, which had fallen into his throat and was slightly leaning towards the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was entirely buried.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called for treatment three days after it had fallen.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I sought it with all subtlety and did not feel it at all;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pain and pressure under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was the tip of the arrow I placed a comforting plaster with digestive properties because the wound did not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and then I saw the point of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the plaster again each day and the wound healed over. The patient felt the arrowhead on the ninth day.
et il le me dist.	And he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound daily until it opened. I tested and felt the tip of the arrowhead which was bent.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I inserted a probe into the wound's opening with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And this lasted about four months. Then the wound became swollen so that I could not insert the forceps and pull out the arrowhead.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Therefore, I did not cease to devise and contrive methods of instruments until on the tenth day I obtained good tongs according to what its shape will come to in the end of this chapter, so that I pulled it and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient became entirely healthy.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you about the extraction of certain arrows; therefore, set your care upon what I have not said, for books cannot encompass everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Yet the wise master compares even small things and finds new works and nine instruments for the treatment of unusual cases that arise in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows enter the limbs where they are struck in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either at the point where they enter, or from another side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which jumps forward where it enters is an arrow entering flesh, and sometimes it jumps suddenly.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let it remain until the flesh can be pulled around it, and the joint relieved.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it remain for some days, and move it each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it will jump out, and if it does not, carefully cut around the entire point with a fine blade until the surrounding area is widened, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the bone of the head and goes into one of the ventricles of the brain, some of the accidents that I have mentioned may befall the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	do not pull it out but leave it alone for some days until it is even with the surface again, because if the arrowhead comes into the brain, death will follow.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrowhead is stuck only in the bone and does not reach the brain, and the patient remains for some days without bad symptoms, then you can attempt to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply stuck thus and cannot come out, then apply poultices around it as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the place until it is sound.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrowhead is stuck in such a way that one cannot see it, then search for it everywhere.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, then draw it out with some tool.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then make it wider until the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And draw out the arrowhead if you can, and if it has ears by which it holds, then remove the flesh that is stuck into it on both sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead so that you can draw it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And be careful not to break the arrowhead while drawing it out, for this would cause greater pain.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	"And if you cannot do it all at once, leave the arrowhead until the wound around it is healed, then pull it out, for extraction will be easier."
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the bleeding is contrary to you, then follow what we have said about its treatment in this chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	And guard against incising the nerve or the vein; and devise how you can carefully remove the arrowhead without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient in the position they were in when the arrow struck them, for that is the greatest help. And if you cannot do this, then place them according to the signs that indicate it.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	An arrow that comes from another side, where something of it is visible or the skin is swollen there, can be felt around it:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	then cut down until forceps can grasp it, and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	If it is stuck now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, twist your hand round until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then resume the extraction until it comes out:
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is a splinter of the arrowhead, remove the entire piece.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	And if the stake falls, and you wish to administer cautery, then insert the heated instrument so that the tip of the arrow enters the wound of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	Then apply fire, and if the arrow is stuck in deep, insert the heated instrument with its point entering inside to ease extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrowhead has touched the lung,
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls into the thigh, belly, bladder, ribs or side, and it is near, and you can reach it, then cut towards it;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, then extract it, and then stitch the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat splints is similar to a bird's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	There are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like that of a bird's feather, for striking at the tip of the arrow, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the pliers for attaching and removing is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common flesh
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are 31 veins from which bloodletting is performed, among them there are 16 that are located in the head, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	The two temporal veins behind the ears, called the 'doubles' or 'twin' veins;
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	And the two arteries that are visible in both temples.
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And the two veins that are in the inner corners of both eyes, which are called 'aspires'.
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is within the forehead.
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	And the vein that is at the back of the neck.
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	And the two glands that are in the neck.
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are above the lips of the mouth, which are called 'auguerich'.
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	And the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins commonly spoken about are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	The first is the cephalic, and it runs along the right side of the chest, which common people call 'the vein of the head'.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	And the second is called 'fast', and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica veins; common people call this 'the vein of the heart'.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And the basilica runs along the left side of the chest; common people call it 'the vein of the belly', and it is above the forearm; this is the one that is openly visible in the elbow pit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the savatelet is the vein which is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	And in the leg and at the foot are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	the first is under the curve of the pocket on the left side, and the second is the saphenous vein which is at the ankle on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nisse," which is in the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And under those are three veins in the other leg.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bleeding of veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and headaches.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the qualities of bleeding are such that you should raise the patient's head and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then have the patient strain his neck with a vise until two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	So grasp them with your fingers and where you feel the pulse beneath your fingers, then squeeze tightly;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet and insert it under the vein up to the bone, then raise your hand along the entire length of the vein, and cut through the skin and vein firmly twice near the crossing point, allowing blood to flow until you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then squeeze it and bind it tightly until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already discussed incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The surgery of the two arteries that are in the two temples is useful for migraine, headache, and customary ophthalmia, and for the course of tears from the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the qualities of the surgeon are as I said
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And it is that the patient stretches out their neck so that both veins appear clearly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And feel the pulse beneath your thumb, and then press firmly
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then place your fingertip on the vein above your thumb, insert the lancet underneath it, raise the vein up and cut it as you did with the other veins, allowing blood to flow according to your needs.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then remove from the patient and place your two hands on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And then tie it firmly, leaving it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have spoken of their causes and remedies, at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the frontal vein is as good as that of the temporal vein for treating old facial diseases, migraine, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting it, until the veins appear;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called the 'fossor', of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein and press with your hand or something else, allowing blood to flow out according to what you desire.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then untie the patient's neck and tie the vein until it is healed, often using a wide bandage.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, the bandage should not be too tight;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	And move it across, for the bone is near, and sometimes the ligaments break when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The cautery of the two veins that are in the temples helps against eyestrain, and against headache, and against redness, and against the whiteness in the eye, and against facial diseases.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the qualities of its cautery are such that the patient twists his neck to one side, as previously mentioned.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the cautery, and let the cautery be across, somewhat long, somewhat wide with fire, for there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the fire is too thin, it might break.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then let blood flow freely until you have enough, and then bind with cotton, binding it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The cautery of the vein on the neck is good for ague, and for manic frenzy, and for facial diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is chronic.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	The quality of sneezing is that the patient strains their neck, then holds their nose to your left hand, and takes a long thin reed and sticks it between the two nostrils in the space that is not open well, and now blood will begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not go too deep, make the blood flow according to your need, then let it lie for one night, for it will be quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	This is the shape of the reed:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	Sneezing from both nostrils helps with childbirth, the beginning of menstruation, and many diseases, including measles, scabies, and hernias.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of sneezing is that the patient strains their neck on both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	And let the master stand on the patient's head, and the patient sit on a seat, then open the vein with a long cut slightly wide, then draw out blood temperately or as much as needed.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then perform another on the other vein, then untie it, and gently compress around the veins so that the patient does not strangle.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it be until morning, for the wound to heal.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sanctity of the veins above the lips helps with coughing in the mouth and with gum corrosion, lip fissures, nosebleeds, and around the nostrils
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of healing are such that you should make the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, which are known by their black color and by the small black veins around them;
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	therefore cut one and the other, but if you do not recognize them or are in doubt, then cut the largest of each side, and similarly do for the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The healing of the veins below the tongue helps after the healing of the temporal vein, and it is for the tightening of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the qualities of the pulse are that the patient feels between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks down on each side for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then feel both, but do not go too deep, as underneath are the arteries
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the wrist that are commonly felt are felt in two ways
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either pricking like a broad flame, or olive-like and subtle like a cutting edge, and is called "anesis";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are broad or subtle according to the width and narrowing of the veins
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the myrtle flame is very well-known, and it is wide as you see
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	It is necessary to open hairless veins filled with visible thick blood that contain thick and turbid blood
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive-like flame
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more finely pointed and is for healing thin veins that contain clear yellow blood
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The pulse of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps those with illnesses below the throat, neck, breast, and belly
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And the pulsator must feel for rigor and beware of the artery underneath
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he severs the artery, and blood begins to flow, it must be staunched, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And the flame should not be sharp, but cutting like a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilisk does not open plainly, you must remove it and replace with another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you want any part of it, or you sew in its place the vein within the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	It opens plainly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And cut with a knife-like flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see the location of the vein, then you should also remove the arm, and touch the location until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the point from below, then tie the arm, and cut the vein with a knife-like flame;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	And beware that you do not strike the artery when you see the location swollen, for it is the artery:
eschui la donques.	Squeeze it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see something red and thin like a child's urine coming out on top, know that it is arterial blood:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry then, and place your thumb firmly upon it; then remove your thumb if the bleeding stops, for this happens many times.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Bind up the arm, leave it thus, and do not let the patient move it
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be afraid to move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the bleeding does not stop and you faint, and a physician is not present, then cut the artery if it is visible, for its mouth will contract.
et estainche li sans.	and the bleeding will cease.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a bark of fig and cut it open, then take one half and bind it securely until the next day
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if the bleeding has stopped, that's good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	But if not, then treat it with powders that stop blood flow, as we have said
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stitching is not considered sufficient in many cases due to the smallness of the wound's opening, and the power of the sinews of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein in the middle if it stands out helps to draw blood from above the head and below the body, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and the surgeon must be careful for the nerve that is beneath, and if it goes too deep and touches the nerve, and swells, the wound will not heal properly, and sometimes it cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve often opens, and if it does not open in some people due to its fineness, then you must cauterize it with the instrument called 'anesil'.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And avoid touching the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is space between the two nerves, make an incision along it
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The cephalic vein also helps to draw blood from the head and aids the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to cauterize with the olive-oil flame or the myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, it is necessary to find the lightest place, and do not give up if it fails the first time; start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and sometimes the place swells in some people when it fails the first time, but it causes no harm
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the surgery depends on your skill.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about cauterization is that it is only performed to maintain health and prevent future illnesses
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the cautery be made on one of the three veins located at the elbow:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	namely, the cephalic, basilica, and forearm veins
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and cauterization should be performed at the beginning of Lent, in autumn, and in winter after meals, when the sign of repletion appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and cauterization should be done on the first or third day, after two or three hours into the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The medicine administered to patients has no fixed time, but whenever there is need by day or night, at all hours and at any time;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Nor should children be given medicine until they are fourteen years old, nor women during the first four months of pregnancy until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should one operate on the elderly who have passed sixty years of age
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wishes to take medicine in any manner, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a light enema if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful impurities from the intestines into the main organs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor should one take medicine who is too full of food, nor one who is drunk, until they sober up, nor one who is dropsical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And beware of taking medicine after an attack of the colic, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive menstruation in women, hard labor, wakefulness and fasting, or any great weakness, either from illness or injury to the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then refine the humors if blood is thick, by foods and beverages and medicines, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then use a bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood, and wash the vein around the third rib, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And guard yourself that day from work, and overeating, and lust, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And be at ease and joyful, and let the vein being bled be higher than the others, and rub the arm twice or thrice, then tie the bandage moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow correctly.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	Then rub the place with both hands until the veins swell and can be felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then wet the vein with a little bit of old oil, then place his left thumb on the vein below where he intends to bleed, ensuring that the vein does not bulge or break when struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flee as if they were strings in the skin, and some of these are filled with windiness so that when one applies fire, it retreats from the fire and cannot open the vein; and thus some people are.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for which reason the surgeon should be careful in such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens on the first attempt, that's good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then start again a little lower or higher suddenly, if the area is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the area is swollen and the patient is afraid, let him wait one or two days without binding his arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	perhaps a boil will appear;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter into baths, then continue the cautery if he wishes.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the hole is small and blood flows subtly, or you doubt that enough blood is flowing, then apply fire directly to that hole with all force.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And perform it rather hastily, before the place becomes inflamed.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	For this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the place inflamed, do not recommence the cautery, but put on a little oil ointment, for it lightens the body of blood and turns the inflammation to the better in this place.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And apply the ointment of oil in every cautery you perform on veins, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	This same thing does tripcord and bowstring when applied to the place.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	So that the blood is thinned out and dispersed when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there appears a large abscess, which often happens, especially when no cautery was performed except at the time when the vein was opened and the opening was small, then hasten to apply an sponge moistened in hot water and salt, and compress it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from the vein stops, and if any blackness or greenness remains in place after some days, then it does no harm;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see, place something of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mastich, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times an abscess and swelling appear at the site of the incision:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Then place your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft under pressure from your hand, then that appearance is harmful.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	So be careful not to place anything of what we have said there, for fear of damaging the artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	But make a dry poultice to harden the spot, then treat it with another cure until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw off blood according to its quantity and according to its color.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see it thick, let it be until it thins;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if he is too hot, let him cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	It is necessary for one who is full and fat, and needs bloodletting, that a larger incision be made, and the flame be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	But for one who is weak, do the opposite; they must be bled more gently and frequently, and bleeding should be done by cutting across rather than pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of bloodletting prevents loss of blood and injury to nerves, and is better than bleeding done with a long or wide instrument.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	For one whose body fails at being bled, it is necessary to give them a drink made from crushed pomegranate juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If they are overheated, let them bleed three or four times; but if they have a cold complexion, let them drink beforehand a decoction made from musk syrup or honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, well scented.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after losing much blood, afterwards he should inhale broth of flesh, and fragrant subtile syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the chapter on syncope for evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to empty the arm vein and be bled again later, it is necessary that when he is weakened by much bloodletting, he be bled little by little according to his continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to empty the arm vein after the first bloodletting and has a strong body, should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to have blood drawn from another vein should be bled on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood within the body which has already become heated, causing fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If it becomes necessary to draw out a large quantity of blood, then one should widen the incision as far as it falls into palm
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then, after dressing all the wounds and placing your hand on the pulsating flesh when it heals, ensure that nothing comes in place of palm, for this often happens when healers are careless;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And do not, when you see a loosened arm and blood begins to flow for the second time, close the wound without pressing firmly upon it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	Nor if it is curved, should he hastily extend his arm, for this would be harmful;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	But allow him to remain until it heals a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Where you should touch with the tip of fire until the blood that has frozen at the mouth of the vein flows out again, and put on some cotton wool moistened in water, pressing lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not squeeze it until the inflammation has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is a necessity to draw blood a second time, do so in the same vein or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are bled in place of the head vein because they are connected.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the healing is thus: The patient places their hand in warm water until the bones are red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears clearly; then apply the cautery across, not along or lengthwise.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And the hole should be wide; cauterize it close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot flow out, put the hand back in warm water until enough blood has flowed into the water.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it's wintertime, do not put the hand back in hot water, for one puts it in more often in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And cauterizing this vein is safer than any other, as there are no arteries or nerves there.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The cautery of the vein on the right hand [palm] is beneficial for all diseases of the liver; this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Press the hand and put it in warm water until the vein swells so that it can be seen;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the sinew is transverse, and you cut it entirely throughout, then it causes no harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And do not cut too deeply, for nerves lie beneath all sinews of flesh; then place the hand in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	"And once you have cleaned off as much blood as necessary, then place a bandage of oil and flax to quickly bind the wound, and do this for each wound."
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	"The swelling in the left hand is attributed to mouse disease, so perform the same treatment as I have instructed for the right hand."
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of the spleen is beneficial for all ailments beneath the body, such as diseases of the marrow, retention of fluids, diseases of the reins, and old afflictions of the thighs and legs, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the procedure for this dislocation is that the patient places his foot in warm water and rubs along the vein until it breaks, then tie above the ankle joint.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	The vein is at the ankle, and many veins go up the leg from there.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Therefore cut where the largest vein runs, or at the ankle.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you cut on the leg, beware of the nerves beneath and also cut transversely as in cutting sinews.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the blood flow out freely.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	"And if the blood cannot flow out, then put the foot back in the water and allow the vein to drain well."
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the first incision fails, then begin again a little higher up because the place is salted.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not hesitate on nerve, as we have said, and likewise do so with the sinew of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	"The location of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle joint, and its cauterization benefits sciatica pain when it is due to hot blood."
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of its heating is that when the patient enters the bath, he should strain on top of the ankle four times while twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then heat in all ways that you can, and crosswise;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And it is important that you cover it quickly, for the place is bare, and it responds much to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	But if you do not find it, then heat any vein that opens on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and do so until you see blood flow, then untie the bandage, and put cotton on it and bind it.
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	And regarding cupping treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Ventouses are made of horns, or earthenware, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And bloodletting is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Wherever you strike and draw blood.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cauterization without striking is of two kinds:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is performed with fire or without fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	And cauterization done by striking and drawing blood is performed on fourteen parts of the body, one of which is located on top of the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the other is in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	And two others are on either side of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And the cupping glass below the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	And the cupping glasses for both shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the cupping glasses for the elbows;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the cupping glasses for both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	And the cupping glasses for both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	And the cupping glasses for both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and cauterization without bloodletting treats only the small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and does not weaken the body in any way.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered with or without fire in any disease caused by excess until the entire body has been evacuated.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if it is necessary to undergo bloodletting due to illness or custom, let us perform it each hour at the beginning of the month or at the end, and also in between every time.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are some who, when they need bloodletting, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And others find fulfillment and redness in their face, and in their head, and on the neck, and darkness before the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	Others experience a taste of blood in their mouth, have an swollen tongue, and cough up blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And there are those who dream or see blood flowing, wounds, death, or similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	"And when we see these signs, especially if they occur during the month, we order cupping to be performed after three hours of the day."
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The sweat of the face helps against the headache that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary for this to happen after evacuating everything from the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this bloodletting takes the place of sweating from the head, and those who are of cold temperament or have a cough should not practice it, for it causes them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And therefore, it is not necessary for the elderly to use them, nor those with cold head diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	"And those who often bleed themselves become forgetful, so one must place the cupping vessel a little lower down to avoid forgetfulness."
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	Wind in the neck is located between the sinew of the head and the spine, and therefore it helps with constriction of the chest and breaking up blockages in the pulmonary vein, as well as coughing and fullness.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And therefore it should be released gently, for if it holds too firmly, it can cause harm to the stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	Winds in the two ribs of the neck are beneficial for headaches, ophthalmia, migraines, constriction, and pain in the roots of teeth, and they are located between the sinews of the spine.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And you should command the surgeon to compress his hand on the wound so that he does not cut the artery or cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	Winds under the chin are beneficial for mouth diseases and corruption of gums, as well as similar illnesses that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	And it is the place of healing for the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	"Cupping on the shoulders is beneficial for illnesses that come from heat and excess;"
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The dilation of the ribs is worth as much as three veins of the arm, because it attracts blood from those large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply into it, for the place is bare of flesh and has nerves and arteries beneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass placed on the buttock is useful for haemorrhoids of the fundament and for diseases below it. It is necessary that the cup be large and made of brass so that it may draw well.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And perhaps if it were thin, it would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	Cupping glasses on the legs heal openly because they attract blood from all over the body, and are useful for old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and hips, and relieve blockages.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	And they are located on the two popliteal spaces and the two ankles, but still they weaken the body after long use and bring about lethargy in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The manner of applying the cupping glass is as follows: first place it empty, and suck temperately, then place it hastily, and move evenly, and do not cease until you see that the spot has turned red and swollen, and the color of blood appears.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then heat, and reset the cups, and take care with the arrangement of the body, for there are those who have thin flesh, and large pores:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	Therefore it is necessary to strike only once, and make wide wounds, a bit deep;
et suce legierement.	and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the blood is thick, then strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very dense, then strike a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we wish to draw blood little by little, one strike suffices.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, then repeat often.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the blood is thick, strike deep, and the endpoint is that the heart is pierced suddenly. It is necessary for those who have tough and hard skin, and narrow pores, to grease the spots of the cups with clarifying and dissolving oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is summer, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of squash seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it's winter, of cress oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	"And if the excess blood is thick and cold, use myrrh oil, balsam oil, fennel oil, or similar."
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one whose skin is tender and has wide pores is treated with a cautery, no oil should be applied there, but it should be washed afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	"And those with excessive moisture should rise using hyssop water, myrtle water, sumac water, or similar substances."
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses rise from old wine, or water of the sieve, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or others similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And they should not use a cupping glass before bathing nor during bathing, but rather after the bath for one or two hours;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And do not sleep after the cupping, and they should warm themselves when they are to be cupped and when they have been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And warn those who are being bled that if they are choleric and the blood is too thick and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	then they should eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endive and lettuce with vinegar, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And eat pullets, and flesh of castrated animals, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with cold complexion should take honey syrup and moderately scented wine which is between old and new, and eat little meat and young chickens and small birds.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day he vents himself, he should drink more than he eats.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	It is sometimes necessary to give certain men either treacle or muscat before or after evacuation to strengthen the main members
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	Let the blood be subtly drawn, but it should not be done for those who are hot.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cupping glasses placed without striking are those placed on the liver, womb, podagra, belly, buttocks, and thighs; for these members do not tolerate being struck upon, and this is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we place them on the breasts when milk comes out.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	To remove the stiffness from the limb, as we apply cupping glasses to the belly and chest to reduce swelling.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And relieves pain when there is congestion or stone, its attractive force sometimes draws out the congestion, or dislodges the stone from its position.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And similarly it does when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, these cups are applied empty to suck gently only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And sometimes they are used together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in diseases of the lungs, so that one fills the cup with warm water or water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of administering the cupping glass with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And let there be two cups of half a palm in width and depth, with a small hole on the side around the middle, like that for putting a needle through, made of bronze, softened beforehand so it does not cut the patient when placed on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And let there be in the middle a rod of crosswise earth or iron, to place an enclosed candle upon, and let them be both large and small according to the diseases and the strength of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the cupping glasses for children are different from those for adults, and for thin people they are different from those for fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And thus one must place this cupping glass upon the limb
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	light the candle of wax or linen and place it within the cupping glass through the rod that is inside the glass so that the flame is at the bottom of the glass where it will not burn the patient
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it upon the limb so that it is over the opening we spoke of, so that when one wishes, steam can escape and the cupping glass be removed
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and relight the linen as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	Therefore, in the case of the cupping glass used for pleurisy or any acute disease, there is no rod nor opening, and it is heated only when full of air, and is placed upon the limb alone.
et c’est li forme:	And this is the shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction cups are not used except in members where one cannot apply cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	And on places without flesh, such as the back or nose, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of using them is that when you find suction cups which are in sharp, clean waters without any defect, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And place one in soft water until they become supple and have nothing inside their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	Then let it be heated with vein and suction cup, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the suction cups on.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are full and hang down, if it is a place where one can apply cupping glasses, then do so, for this is very beneficial.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the place gently and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the wound becomes too hot afterwards on the body of the sick person, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the blood is cooled.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the blood increases, then apply powdered vitriol or salt, and similar things, until it cools down.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or place half a handful of peeled beans on the wound, let them sit until they become warm, and now it will stop bleeding.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more, take additional ones.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the wounds will not close by themselves, then rub fresh blood onto the wound and insert a needle until the blood comes out, then place the beans on top; as soon as they sense the blood, they will become warm.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are full, then sprinkle a little powder made of aloe and sel or ash on them, and now they will burst.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and provides treatment for broken bones and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that foolish physicians throw themselves into this chapter without having seen any of the ancient books or read any letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason knowledge is extracted from our land, for I never found any good there.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the subject, and through experience, and through the custom of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	And I have described for you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	"Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the sums of speech and chapters where the wise places his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are tried may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when any fracture or dislocation or torsion or contusion comes to anyone, you should quickly bandage the patient on both sides if nothing prevents you from doing so, such as weakness of body, or childbirth, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the weather is not quite hot, or too cold
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and avoid cold things, that is to say cold baths, and the flesh of birds and hares, and do not drink wine nor eat any fatty foods, and do not overindulge in meats that fill the veins with blood until you doubt the formation of an abscess or the expansion of matter in the limb.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient returns to their first state of governance which they had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the sick person with foods that promote growth and have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pears, and veal, eggs, fresh fish, and similar things, and strong wine."
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	"For with this nourishment the wound will close more quickly and completely."
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of the elderly and the infirm cannot be well set or joined together according to their nature due to the tenderness of the limbs, nor those which are too soft, such as the bones of young children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but apply a splint to the broken bone with thick bands that will hold it firmly together until it strengthens as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not let any part of its work remain undone, and for this reason, he must be nourished with plenty of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	"And know that breaks are diverse in many ways."
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	"For a break of the head is different from a break of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways that bones can break."
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	"For there are breaks that happen suddenly, and others that occur gradually, such as when cutting a feather to make a writing pen."
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	"And there is also breakage with wounding, and breaking with just a small crack."
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each manner has its own device and proper tool in the restoration process according to what memory brings to mind;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the breakage of the bone is recognized by the twisting of its place and the gaping opening, and can be felt when pressed with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting nor sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no breakage;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it may well have torsion, or fracture, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	"So do not move the limb by hand, but apply the medications that come later and then gently immobilize it."
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break which goes up into the shoulder joint, where both parts are dislocated, it is necessary to align them evenly before an abscess forms there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess forms there, let it be some days until the abscess subsides;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	Then set it back in its place gently and smoothly, knowing that the restoration of this is easier than those with fragments.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then hold it in place, as described below.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone is broken into pieces, then extend both parts, whether it's hand or foot, or hold it with one hand for small limbs, or use two ropes, or one rope and your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are aligned, gently bring them together using all means, and ensure that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And align the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel with your hand whether it seems well set or not:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If you raise it nicely and do not pull it too tightly or press down as those who cause heat and contractions to the limb through their work, as we have seen many times:
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient not to move it while awake or asleep, turning or in any other manner;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And ensure that the limb is well secured so that no pain is felt.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For if any pain is felt, it is not properly set, and one must position it in such a way that no pain is felt;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And ensure it is placed correctly so that no twisting occurs when it is reset;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For the qualities of a broken limb are as I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	"Know that broken limbs are diverse in size, shape, and thickness."
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	But there are small limbs such as arms and legs and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	It is necessary to wrap linen cloths that are soft and fine;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	And those that are thick, like the thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	So one should wrap it with a wide and strong linen bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the entire limb evenly and compress it on all sides without any gap;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then wrap it with light splints, 3 or 4 turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little on all the bandage, then go above the fracture and tighten less, so that the fracture may move away from the fracture a little;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And loosen the bandage a little bit at a time until you grasp a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it around again over the fractured area;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part below the fracture and tighten it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first binding above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the ligaments swabs of linen or cloth pads, as even as possible, then bind all with bandages above, and then place well-made compresses on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, then place on top something that cools the hot abscess and removes the inflammation, leaving it so for several days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then press upon your compresses with something halfway between a wide reed stalk and a flat piece of wood used for hoes, or palm ribs, and they should be shaped thus:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But the compress placed on the fracture should be somewhat thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And it should also be as long as necessary for the limb's smallness or largeness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then press upon the compresses as you did on the first binding, then bind above with a linen bandage, just as in the first binding over the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	Narrower above, always less;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	And the thread should be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the work of foolish people who use rope-like threads of linen yarn, this is a great error; for the stitch cannot be even if it is too fine, and there should not be less than two fingers' breadth between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	If the patient is injured by the edges of the stakes after stretching in safe places, then place pads of linen or woolen gauze beneath them so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When a wound is accompanied by fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe its treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to stretch all broken limbs with stakes on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, you should not put any sutures until after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess occurring;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And you should take flour that adheres to the walls of the mill and mix it with plenty of eggs. This mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, should be used for the common method of plastering fractures in many positions, especially for women and small children, as it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of plaster restoring breaks, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take equal amounts of alabaster, ladanum, mullein, asafetida, gum arabic, and myrrh.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloewood, equal parts Z
alechil VIIII З.;	aléchil IX Z
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and grind them into powder, then mix with egg yolk.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the complexion of the man is hot, then use this plaster, for it has good composition and quickly heals broken bones. It benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of plaster that is beneficial for twists:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take myrrh and balsam, equal parts Z
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloewood, equal amounts Z
acaice VI З.;	acaic VIII Z
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	bolus armoniac X Z, grind well, and combine with honey or egg yolk, then apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, to alleviate pain, prevent bone wear, and heal fractures:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new linen, wetting it in both saltwater and cooked oil, then place it upon the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore (set bones), but it is good for soothing a hot boil, and removes pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and terrestrial pennyroyal leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to soften the remainder of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of mistletoe, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour; each one part
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind them together. Then combine with wine and use it if the limb is inflamed; otherwise combine it with moistened coriander water or plain water and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of plaster more powerful than the first one when hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take equal parts of mistletoe root, linseed, balm, melilot, silphium, violet flowers, and chamomile flowers
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind them together. Combine with saltwater or fresh water depending on the inflammation of the limb; otherwise use wine for restful limbs.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not apply anything to the broken limb for setting besides wax and oil ointment, and nothing else more. He also says that it should be of medium consistency, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen believes that one should apply dry and slightly warm things to the broken limb for setting, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense and similar substances, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another plaster good for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mullein leaves and chopped male goat hairs, or bird feathers, and almonds, and salt equally, grind them, and make an ointment with the juice.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then, after a few days, check if the patient feels no pain and if the bone has not moved from its place
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	If it does not dislocate again within several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain or itching appears at the location without rest or swelling, hurry and dislocate again, removing the ointment immediately
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And take a light cloth, a wet sea sponge, dip it in water, and wipe the area until the itching stops and the pain is eased
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry linen moistened in water or rose oil, and hold it on with a compress until you are sure there is a warm boil
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and the inflammation of the limb has subsided and the pain is gone, then resume the gentle bandaging, adding a bit of ointment, but not binding it as tightly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and polish it until it's smooth.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	"And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and there is pain and swelling, then you must resume binding it with poultice, just as you did initially."
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if no improvement comes to the limb from what we have said, then do not remove the splint until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and sometimes leave it on for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture has healed and the flesh approaches union;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then remove the splint more securely, and let the flesh grow thicker, as I said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see that the place is drying out too much, know that nourishing it cannot happen;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then apply warm water compresses every time you remove the splint, and this should be done every third day, and loosen the bandage a little;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this work, nourishment comes quickly to the limb, and it remedies swiftly what foolish physicians do, who restore the limb crookedly:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	That is wicked, and such are cowardly works, and I see nothing else but leave it and work correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	"Concerning the different kinds of fractures"
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many types of fractures exist, with diverse shapes, and their causes are distinct.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are fractures caused by the blow of a sword, which breaks all the bone up to the hip joint beneath the bone, like an axe or a tree trunk;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And therefore this type of fracture is called "hachure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this type of fracture is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And the wound in these two types of fractures is either large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	"And if there is an embedded fracture, or a break from falling on stones, or from stones falling, or from similar causes."
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	"And if there is an open fracture that approaches the bone marrow, whether it is below or above the bone, this wound is either large or small."
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And there is also a wound that closes up in the bone as fine as a hair, with a small crack, and therefore this fracture is called "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling or something similar, and pushes the bone fragment inward, creating a hollow like that of a cauldron when struck.
si entre li piere dedens.	If stones are present within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this occurs more often among those who have moist bones at their head, such as children's heads.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens in all types of fractures where small fragments are dislodged like stars.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	And I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	"And we recognize all kinds of fractures through direct examination and probing and by the corrupt flesh on top."
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	"The capillary appearance is recognized by this: when the bone is uncovered and rubbed with vinegar, the fracture becomes black."
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	"In treating a fracture, beware of accidents that may occur in illness. If you see no bad accident such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, extension and paleness, feverish chill, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions in many ways, he cannot be cured without doubt."
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	"And if you see no frightening accident and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment."
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	"And when the injured person first comes to you and it is wintertime, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon that you can."
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	"And if it is in summer, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day so that the flesh under the bone does not become corrupted and the accidents we mentioned do not occur."
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone extends to the tissue covering the brain, then you must cut open the fractured part as follows:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and that you grasp the patient's head gently and uncover the bone in all possible ways and along the length of the wound as softly as possible; if bleeding occurs during this process or a hot abscess appears, help accordingly, and then fill the space with gauze moistened in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the hot abscess is pacified, and ensure that there is no further bleeding;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done in two ways of operation.
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One method is thus: you cut narrowly at the front, and this is its shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	"And then I place another chisel larger than the first."
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is thus: have many cuts of diverse widths, some narrow and others wide, pointed, and made of tempered iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work gently, so that you do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and strong, you should surround it with holes before administering cuts with tongs, not too deep that they penetrate beyond the soft part of the bone. It must have above its point a margin or circle to prevent the point from passing through the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you should have several such points that each one fits its place on the edge of the bone, so that you have tongs for all uses.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the shape of the three kinds of tongs:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The qualities for piercing around broken bones are that you place the tongs on the bone and turn your hands until you know the bone is pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then move the cautery elsewhere a short time later, and do so all around, then cut with scalpels the space of bone that is between the pores, and do this more finely than you can, and gently, as we have said, until you draw out the bone by hand, or by any tool you have such as forceps.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And be sure not to touch the brain nor the spine.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, then reset the remaining sharpness of the bone with another tool similar to a scalpel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other scalpels.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if any small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with one of your tools.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then dress the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another way of working is what the Gauls say, which is safer;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And tie it very tightly, and this is his command.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	"It is necessary first to uncover part of the bone where the fracture appears more. Then you will place beneath the head of this lenticular chisel, of which this is the shape:"
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut on one side only; the part is sharp on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then strike gently with a small hammer all around the bone, and be careful not to injure the tissue beneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is adherent to the bone, scrape it gently, for it can be removed without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	"And if the fracture of the bone does not reach to the skin and the bone is cut only on top with small pieces, then smooth down that roughness and remove the chips with a fine razor, of which you should have many different sizes to use in each place according to the work and the shape of the fracture."
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	"So use larger razors first and then finer ones, continuing until it is all smooth."
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	For each of the other hair cuts and subtle breaks, you must adjust your approach accordingly.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is something that cannot be learned from those who have studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the sinew is exposed, you should take one linen cloth according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled over twice or three times, wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And do this more gently than you are able, so as not to injure the surface; then apply the other lien above it, and do not pull too hard, only enough to touch the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	And leave it thus for one or two days until the boil is cooled; then untie it and apply medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, and other similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And grind these substances into a powder, apply it to the wound, and continually apply warm ointments without biting or chewing them.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	And ensure that the wound is always clean, so that no ointment remains or any flies gather on it; for when flies gather on the cloth of the cerecloth, they will corrupt and cause great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	For when corrosive substances are placed on the skin, they necrotize it.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	"So beware, then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, and be doubtful without doubting too much."
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness appears on the skin due to the medicine applied, which has such power, then take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix them together in a cloth, and apply it to the skin.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then follows the treatment of various diseases, until he is cured.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or one part alone, for these are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And that below is made of cartilage and does not break, but can be bent crooked or twisted, after which it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must put your little finger or thumb into the hole of the nose, and press that break evenly against your index finger, and gently pull from behind, until the nose resumes its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain due to your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	"If the fracture is in the upper part near the elbow and the forearm cannot return to its place, then you must align it with the head of a splint that is somewhat thick."
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if both parts are broken, do the same. And hurry to reset it on the first day if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then place a bandage made of linen cloth on the tip of the nose if it is broken on one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	If you cut one side off another, then if there is a fracture there.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the openings of the wound.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some doctors say that one must grease the tents with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It seems not good to me that they should be dry, but they must be moistened in a mixture of eggwhite and flour powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the bandage until the bone is firm, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes one puts goose feathers in place of bandages, and also wraps it with soft cloth, and if the fracture holds, then the patient breathes more easily.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	do as you see fit
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if gangrene comes nearby while you are working on it, then put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or a little bit of diacalcic on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not form there, then apply a plaster made from flour of barley and powdered incense mixed with egg white, then place light dressings on top without binding the wound.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the fracture of the flesh is small, and it is broken into many pieces, then extract with appropriate instruments, then sew the opening, and care for it as things inside the body are cared for, using suitable plasters and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he has neither a wound nor any other injury inside, treat him with tents and apply splints of lead until he is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Mandible fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken from behind and there is no wound in front, and the break is only on one side without being broken into pieces internally, it can be easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	If the fracture is on the right side, you must put your two index fingers into the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is on the left jaw, put your two index fingers of the right hand into the patient's mouth, gently push the fracture in and hold it with your other hand evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone is broken into two pieces and dislocated from each other, then you should apply traction from both sides until it is even again.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if movements of the teeth occur, or dislocations, tie them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk; then apply cerate to the broken jaw and cover it with a double bandage.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And apply a well-made splint or an even piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it securely. Command the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the alignment has changed, untie it on the third day and then carefully reposition what was dislocated;
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And place emplastrum on top, of flour ground with abundance of eggs or sesame flour, after what you have removed the cerote.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And place a light linen bandage on top, and if the emplastrum dries out, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Healed many times in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if inflammation comes with heat, then apply what we have said many times [i.e., treat the inflammation as previously described].
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is fracture and wound together, examine if no piece of the bone is broken off;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if with suitable tools you can extract it.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your necessity [i.e., cauterize it].
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all the broken pieces and none remain, then sew up the wound if it is large, and place over it one of the poultices suitable for promoting granulation until it is healed.
de la forcele	Here is an entry from a medieval French medical manuscript about reducing fractures of the jawbone (mandible):
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The shoulder blade has broken many times before, and the fracture is of three kinds:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	either it is broken but not dislocated in two places with pieces, which is easiest to reset;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or there is fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the procedure when the fracture is without wound is that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder blade which feels the broken bone;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	And the other extends the neck towards the part.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Then place the break evenly on your two teeth so that the shape is as it should be, with neither appearance nor displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend further, place a round pad of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder according to your necessity;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And stretch and lift the wrist gently, pressing the pad with your hand so that you place the break evenly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you are unable to grasp the head of the forceps at the front because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on their back with their shoulders supported by a pillow. Insert a medium-sized ear spoon under the shoulder, and have an assistant press down on the shoulder until the bone of the forceps lifts up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then align the break with your teeth, and if you find it unstable, you must cut into it;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and gently pull apart the pieces. If the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, then cut one of the incisions that you have;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	But place this tool under the wrist to guard against dislocation:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	And it should resemble a spoon, not be raised, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the power of the work;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And let there be two heads [of the cautery], as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, like the route of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure that the abscess is hot, cut the wound, and if the route is small or you doubt the heat of the abscess, fill the wound with rags and compresses according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot inflammation occurs, then soak one cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The bandaging of the bone when there are no wounds and no cuts is that you place on the bone the poultice made from flour and oak bark, and put light dressings on top, and place a splint under the limb if necessary;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide bandage about a palm's width in length, then place two cloths on top of the dressings and poultice;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a thin strip of linen about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang loose;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And place the needle on the break, and wrap the bandage above the neck, and below the healthy shoulder, and below the dislocated shoulder.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And then reset each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the break well, and you clearly see that the needle does not move from the broken bone, then reinforce it every day. And once the ligature loosens, restrain it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	And make the patient lie on his back and put a small pillow under the shoulder when he sleeps to lift up the shoulder.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	Thus lighten the break's pressure by lifting the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck and do not untie it in case of an accident for up to 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then recommence the reduction if necessary, and hold it and leave it thus until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And it is restored within 28 days, but for some men less time passes.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Here ends the treatment for a broken shoulder.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It happens that the shoulder joint breaks or moves out of place, and one cannot know unless touched.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	If it appears according to the shape of the break, and you reset it according to its natural form in all ways possible.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then place on the joint powder from a millstone with abundant egg whites, and light bandages, and cover with a doubled cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then place over it a wide and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there are any hairs under the splint in some part of the shoulder, wrap those hairs with linen bandages so that the splint lies evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then bind it tightly with a large bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the binding each day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time he moves, bind it tightly, and keep the splint even if it has moved from its place, and have the patient lie on his side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder is reset in twenty days or twenty-five.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is completed, then remove it, and be sure of it, for it is not bone that can set itself easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out and is not under the heart, then cut it off, and do what we have said in the treatment for a broken collarbone to calm the hot inflammation.
de la brisure dou pis	Here ends the treatment for a broken shoulder blade
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The leg sometimes breaks in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	But it often breaks at the lower end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it breaks in mid-air, it leans downwards and the patient feels great pain, faints quickly, often vomits blood, and sometimes the bone marrow is visible through the broken bone.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and brings the ribs of the two sides close with your hands, carefully bringing them even in all ways you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then places plasters and bandages above the subtle layer of salt or another light wood, wrapped in a cloth, and holds it on the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and ties the bandage evenly around the back, and tightens it moderately, and releases each hour a little, and if it loosens, then tightens it;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	And if it needs to be untied, due to corrosion or itching that occurs there, or pain or abscess, then hasten and untie it, and remove the emplaster, and apply remedies suitable for the situation.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the emplaster, and hold it firmly until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	"of the breaking of the ribs"
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that fractures of the ribs occur only in large areas after the back and at the head within, and they break only because they are smooth.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	And one can feel it well upon examination, as you will see.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment for this is to set the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a splint, and secure it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the fracture of the ribs is inward, the patient feels great pain and piercing, like a stitch in the side, because the bone pierces the flesh.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And it leads to paleness and fainting, and vomiting of much blood, and this indicates serious illness, and those who are experienced have put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	"And there are those who say that it should be administered foods that swell the belly, to push the break outwards."
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	"We do not do this, lest many boils come if they were not there before."
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	"And if they have come, then heal them."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And some say that one should apply cupping glasses to the area to suck strongly, which seems reasonable.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	Despite this, there is doubt that the cupping glasses will draw out the excesses to their proper place due to weakness of disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	"And some say that one should cover the spot with damp wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to keep the bandage even around it, then treat with the pleurisy remedy of meat and medicine."
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	If the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone pressing on the skin, and there is doubt about this, then one must cut upon the site of the broken rib, and place a tool underneath to support the side.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then one must saw through the bone, gently pull it out, and afterwards sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, cleaning it with poultices until it is clean.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if a swelling comes out in the form of an abscess, then place moistened cloths dipped in rose oil on top, and apply them to the site.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the site as if it were an abscess until it is healed, keeping it warm on that side constantly until it is clean.
de la brisure dou col	"concerning the fracture of the neck"
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it happens that they bend;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will heal or not, take note if you see their hands softened, swollen, and lifeless, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many cases, and if he moves them and feels when they are pressed or pricked, know that the bone joints are saved, and that the patient will be cured if treated.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if such thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healthy or not, then observe if the feet are softened, and if there are accidents in the hands, and on the back windiness and involuntary expulsion occur;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when they fall asleep on their belly, involuntary expulsion occurs.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is asleep on his back and wants to mount, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	If one does not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not occur, then the case is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you apply if there is a hot abscess; put rose oil or oil of rue on the spine until it is appeased;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then place one of the comforting and drying emplasters, and the glue of a linden tree, and instruct the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And do not let them sleep on that part where they feel pain until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone separates, then cover the chest;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And remove the bone, then join together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one suture, then heal it with ointment surrounding the flesh until it is clean.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the bone head is broken, which is called the 'cow's head', insert your left hand's pouch and place it even with the other hand at full power, then put the splint and bandage on top if needed.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then bind it, and if there is displaced bone, cut and remove it, and heal the wound until it is clean.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Regarding the fracture of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	If the thighbone is broken, there will be a slight loss of function at the top;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And cut it along its length, declining towards the divided end, and it brings the patient pain and throbbing where it is broken, with swelling around it.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And to set it right, stretch your hand upwards until you are above the break;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	And know what is the breakage and the shape of it;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	If the break is at the head only, then set that break even with its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	"And if the fracture is long or slants inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that the reduction of that fracture may be convenient."
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it even, then place a splint, then place a wooden or bone rod on top of it and hold the break so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and tie the sling under the armpit until the sling is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	"And command the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back."
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if a red abscess comes up there, do not touch it until the red abscess has abated, and then place what we have mentioned before;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to setting it right, and hold it as it should be held if there is no bad complication;
et c’est li maniere.	And that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder blade is what is between the chest and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should reset it according to one of these two ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	Of which one is that you take a piece of large-grained wheaten flour, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie two lengths of linen around the head, and hang them upwards, and have the patient sit on a seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then cast his broken arm onto the board until it reaches the elbow and is in the middle of its curve, then hang some heavy weight on it or have the assistant hold it down;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then align the break with his hands together, so that the break returns to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is to prop up the patient on their bed and have them hold their hand at their neck; then command two ministers such that one pulls the part above the break towards him while the other pulls the lower part downwards, each one stretching in his respective direction.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction should be stronger, then hold the ligature below the fracture and above it, and extend each of the assistants to their respective places.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you must place one length of linen underneath the elbow and another towards the side, underneath the break;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and similarly if the break is towards the side, one length of linen should be placed lightly and without force so that the break is aligned with its proper position on the side;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	then align the break properly and bind it firmly, lest any swelling occur.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess appears, do not incise it until seven days have passed; instead, apply moistened linen with rose oil, until the abscess subsides.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then incise it, and the method of incision is to place the spatula on the break, then bring the arm up towards the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And then bind it with bandages, holding the shoulder and arm in place so that the arm is in its proper position unless something prevents it or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone may move, use splints; place a broader and stronger splint on the break, with two fingers' space between each splint, ensuring each splint is wide enough to extend three fingers beyond either side of the break.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then bind around the splints, as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter concerning fractures, binding more tightly and without stretching.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the swelling of the joints, and the tension, as we have mentioned, in the place where you reset the broken limb, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave it alone until the seventh day, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then examine each joint on the third day after bandaging to ensure that no itching or inflammation occurs there, so that the healing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the hip joint, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, then do not untie the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and place underneath the shoulder-blade one cushion filled with even wool, and watch every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move or the bandages become softened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If by the power of medicine the patient recovers, and receives the food that we have mentioned earlier, let it be administered in such a way that the food is first softened.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And when it begins to heal, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	It is customary that the arm and leg should be reset after forty days in total;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	Then, one should untie it and apply baths and ointment medicines to direct it to its proper place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, let it remain dislocated for forty days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Here is an English translation of the French text about the treatment of a broken arm:
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones called the 'fossae', one of which is small and supports the elbow;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large and lies beneath towards the little finger;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Sometimes only the large 'fossa' breaks, or sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	If the small 'fossa' is broken, the restoration will be easy, and healing will occur;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	But if the large one is broken, then healing will be poor, and more grievous than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be gently straightened and aligned.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it's the large 'fossa', it must be pulled harder;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	And extend [it] upon the cushion; draw back the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the little finger be lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over themselves, and the cushion should be in front of them so that the patient feels no discomfort.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the minister's strong arm to the part below his hand or elbow; another minister should be placed above it.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then the doctor should set it straight according to its natural shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, place each one in its proper place; and if there is any misplaced piece that touches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut it off and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with breaking open a wound, I have spoken about that in the specific chapter
si pren la cure.	then take care
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of recovery boils appear, then apply a cloth of cerote made from rose oil and white wax, so that it is not too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and bind the cloth gently until the boil is relieved.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the cerote, and place the plaster of the powder of millet with abundance of egg yolk; then apply the bandages, and let the bandage of the wound be always stronger and a little wider than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	And you shall know that he ought to have six braces on his arm in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	Whether the break is in one bone or two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	And bound more tightly above the fracture than elsewhere, and less so when aligning it, as I said at the beginning of this chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Let the thread used for binding be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the bandage after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should bathe the limb with hot water until that itching is soothed;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then recommences the stretching, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, adjust it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if care is taken that the healing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a little and leave it like that for some days until the healing reaches it, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not untie him for up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	And whoever is around should then wrap his hands around his neck, and keep them even; he should guard against movement and trembling, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And know that this dislocation is healed in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Chapter 18: On the Fracture of the Hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and on our elbows there are few fractures, and only then do they occur frequently.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the palm of the hand is dislocated or folded, it is necessary for the patient to sit cross-legged and sit upright directly before him evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then he places his hand on the extended towel, and the ministers extend the broken bones, and the physician joins them evenly, so they are properly aligned.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And he applies the emplaster and bandages, if an abscess does not form, then he places a splint according to the quantity of the location.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the dislocation is around the wrist on the palm side, then make a splint of cloth and instruct the patient to bind it tightly to their injured palm.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And then he binds it with a long cloth strip, and the splint should be of soft wood as large as the palm of the hand, binding it as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, then a roller should be placed on top of it and another underneath in the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap everything around the hand tightly and secure the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the bone-breaker comes to any of us on the side, if it is the dislocated one, then set it even as it should be.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And hold it with the palm of your hand, and if you see fit, place a small straight splint to raise the bone-breaker, and do not move it;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the bone-breaker is on another side, like in the index finger or one of the others, then set it even and tie it with the healthy hand that follows;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	Or you can bind them all together holding them still, or place a splint on top, as for dislocations.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And be careful in resetting and disposing of hot abscesses, and treat those who come to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Fracture of the thighbone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The thighbone is often broken, and it is clearly visible when it turns forward and backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And the reset is this: tie one bandage above the bone-break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on their face, then each servant extends his rope to his side equally.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the break is within the bone
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the dislocation is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligaments should be towards the little finger, and the other ligament under the dislocation.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then let the rope be by the knee, and let the extension be below.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then the doctor places the bone evenly with both hands, until it is according to its natural shape, and then applies the splint, and the bandage, if no abscess comes out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down before returning to your work and your treatment
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You must wrap the break with two or three layers of hard doubled bandage, and tie up any excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and insert a long string between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and bring the ends of the string upwards.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then wrap the bandage around the leg and hip, then place the splints on both sides, and place one splint on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then fill the empty space between the leg and hip with soft cloth to create even tension, then begin tying firmly three or four times over the splints.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And as you go higher up on the splints, tie less tightly;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then pass the thread you've placed between the leg and hip around both hips twice, tying three splints that are above them, then return to the bottom of the thread so that it reaches near the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And tie it tight enough that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus so that no abscess or swelling or similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if any such thing happens, untie it and treat what has come about as we have said many times before.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	And if there are sharp edges of bone protruding, they must be filed down if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	If this cannot be done, then one must split the joint open and draw fire.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And treat it as we have said until he is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	Sometimes the thighbone breaks in this way when splints are applied, as in the shoulder or arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Nevertheless, the patient does not limp with such restoration.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone is healed in about one month or a little less or more, depending on the variety of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Ligamentous injury of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then it is no more than a crack or hole, and this happens to every wound, and without wound, which everyone feels.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is this: one should place what is around it evenly on its two sides until it is assembled and can move;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then put the splint in place, and if necessary use a round splint, and secure it appropriately; then review all the arrangements that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as cauterizing an abscess or similar treatments;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So apply to each injury what is necessary until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Fractures of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is correctly called 'mustelz', and the other 'foscile';
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And likewise breaking happens equally when it comes to the arm, and for that reason restoration is also equal to that of the arm, and the work is all one. And if both bones are broken together, then the limb turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fibula is broken, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the big bone is broken, great pain is felt, and it is clearly visible;
et torne desoz.	and it turns underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Therefore arrange for extension, place it evenly, and tie the splints evenly;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	But nonetheless, if the fracture is ugly with many pieces, the extension should be less and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And fasten it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, then take two smooth planks of wood that straddle the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from the knee downwards;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap it in two places with bandages above and below, tie it in the middle as well, and thus the leg will not bend to the right or left, which is good;
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And some apply hot poultices of the long bones of the leg; if it is wood, they place the leg to prevent movement, and this is properly done in fractures where there is an open wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And move each day the leg to see if there is any heat or other complication.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound heals completely.
de la brisure des os dou piet	"Of the fracture of the bones of the foot"
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	To the ankle there is no fracture,
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a bone fracture in the foot, and you see these bones protruding over one another, place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were about to walk, then place your foot upon theirs where the bones are sticking out, and press down until they return to their proper places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then apply the splint and bandages, place a small board with two legs underneath the foot's stomach, then bind the foot securely, and after wrapping it in cloths, use other necessary items.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	"And when three or four days have passed, undo the bandages, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they were broken or dislocated."
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the toes are broken, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place on either broken piece a splint according to the length of the bone, and let it be a bit wider; then place underneath the foot the aforementioned table, and hold it firmly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three, or more broken pieces, then place on each a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the table firmly underneath the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And let it be, while standing on top of the table, that the sole of the foot touches it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you should not forget the other things that I have mentioned for other fractures, as we have said;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And treat each case according to what is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	"Regarding the fracture of the wrist bone"
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of a woman's thigh is broken, make her sit wide-legged; then lean her towards the back part, and let her be held from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the space between her thighs with cotton, also adding as much as one stone's weight;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then push down the woman, and raise the back little by little, until suddenly the dislocation jumps back in place, and the bone returns with its socket.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wishes to urinate, remove the dislocation, and once she has urinated, reset it, and do this for about seven days.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If the dislocation is restored, then take a sheep's bladder, attach a tube to its opening, and insert the entire bladder into the joint.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow firmly into the tube until the bladder expands inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The dislocation will then be reset.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then fill it with cotton and leave it like this for a few days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the wrist in either men or women is broken, restore it as we have described for the thighbone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	These nearby breaks are not hidden from those who apply their study and practice, and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	Because fracture indicates, in many cases, the direct path to restoration:
enten le donques.	Then take heed.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the leg, when it is broken, take a goose feather and insert the leg into it
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will soon be healed
de brisure avec plaie	"Regarding fractures with wounds"
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	He who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, should have his wound cleaned immediately, so that the stitches we have mentioned may testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then apply a dressing of vitriol, if you have none other, and then begin to reset the fracture in the same hour or on the same day, unless some obstacle arises.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if some obstacle arises, then leave the reduction until a new day, until the inflammation is subdued, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you bring on an evil complication.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears above the exposed heart, it is necessary that you place it at ease quickly with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension does not fit to put it evenly in your hands, then use this tool made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and therefore it is necessary for the physician to prepare three or four, depending on what he needs in each case of fracture
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and it should be round and somewhat thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your operation, and it should be pointed at the front and thick in the middle toward the front, like this
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called 'palainche', therefore the curved head must be placed on the visible top of the bone
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And push back all at once until it returns, and they are even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and tools cannot grip the bone well, then you must cut off the head of the bone until tools can grasp it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then cut off one of its ends with an appropriate instrument, such as a scalpel or saw, with all your strength;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then scrape what remains on the bone with sharpness and fine shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset but the patient still feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you do so much that it is in its place, then wet a cloth in black sternutatory wine, and use it properly if it is inflamed;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put on the wound any cerate or other thing that has oil in it, lest decay and corruption come.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then apply dressings when you have restored the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the surrounding skin according to the size of the wound, and make sure that the wound is not constricted by the fracture.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And many foolish doctors have done this and caused harm, death or corruption to the patient on several occasions;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And let the binding be softer and gentler than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that some harm may come of it, as we have said, and you find pain in that place, then do not apply plaster.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	But wrap around it instead, using hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after two or three days that the wound is healing, then remove what you had put on previously and apply healing ointment to it, such as tetraformacon ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dress the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is sound and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bowels can pass downward easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and it still cannot heal but the bowels become obstructed again, know that there are small bone fragments causing this pain. Therefore, you must open the wound with a tent, and remove all these unwanted fragments that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula appears in the place, or another type of corruption, then you must treat it according to what is said in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and lies open on the limb, as in the case of the thighbone or shoulder bone, and other similar large bones, do not pull it out, for many times death ensues, but let it be until it rots.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	Perhaps it will fall off by itself after 20 or 30 days, then dress the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you cannot, then leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	And of fractures that come upon the union
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often inquire about the health of the fracture afterwards, especially when it is near the joint, and it is unpleasant to see the deformity of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And by chance, the limb may not be able to perform its natural tasks.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Therefore, take care if the bone is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If you apply astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar ones; then take some of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with egg white or with honey;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	And put it on the bone in bandages, bind it well, and do not untie it for many days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	Then remove it, and begin another one, until the dislocation is healed.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	'Or you can bind it onto a well-made wooden board;'
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	'For the property of wood is that it draws out all swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	And if the dislocation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut on top of it, and remove the excess;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	When you have any razor sharpener, make sure it is properly removed, and clean it thoroughly until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the limb that is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When a bone fracture has healed, but afterwards the limb remains weak and frail, this happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	One reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bandages, preventing the limb from receiving proper nourishment;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or due to excessive swelling;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or due to moving it too much, not at the appropriate time.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because there is little blood in its body, making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	The treatment for this is to make the patient eat well and exercise their body so that their blood supply increases within them;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and apply baths, provide them with joy and pleasure.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then apply pitch to the limb so that it attracts abundant nourishment, and frequently wash it with warm water until proper nourishment reaches the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Of the limb that is crooked after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is apparent, although its natural function remains
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	but do not believe those foolish ones who say that one must break the limb again entirely, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and such practices are blamed, causing great harm, and sometimes death
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	although, if the joints and muscles are fresh, they should be washed with warm water, or softened with herbs cooked, such as fig leaves, roots, and melilot, and similar things
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and apply a softening poultice, such as well-made diachylon, and take the mucilage of figs, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and make a poultice
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or take fat figs, grind them with fennel seed, and similar medications that soften the union
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the dislocation is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And arrange gentle movement of the limb each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the twisted parts are withered and hardened like stone, it is necessary to remove them with iron, cutting gently up to the bone with a fine incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply care and diligence in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	"Here begins the book of dislocations."
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	"Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its proper place, preventing it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient."
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	"If dislocation occurs in anyone, it must be immediately reduced without delay."
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	But if one delays, the area swells, and perhaps it will not be set back in place properly;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	Therefore, one should not move it until it is no longer swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	often brings about spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	However, when this happens, apply a poultice to the patient, then leave it alone until the swelling is relieved;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then rise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as they come back into their proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	"And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from head to foot."
des mandibules	"of the jawbone(s)"
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It can happen that the lower jaws are dislocated inward, and the dislocation of both is of two kinds:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	either they are a little displaced from their place, or somewhat softened;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	If they are completely dislocated and hang toward the chest, saliva flows from the mouth so that it cannot be held back, nor can the mouth be closed, and the tongue becomes entangled with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	"If the dislocation is slight, it returns on its own through various manipulations."
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and do it in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head and the surgeon puts his little finger of one hand into the root of the jawbone dislocation inside the mouth if the dislocation is on both sides;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and let the other two fingers of the same hand be spread apart to press evenly.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	Tell the patient to soften his jaw and move it in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	"And the doctor places it back into its proper place until it returns."
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if resetting is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then warm water and oil should be applied until they can be easily reset.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not delay the resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, then place moistened cloths made from wax and rose oil on it, then tie it lightly with soft linen.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient lie on their back, with their head between two pillows so they do not move to the right or left, nor attempt to chew, but take only light food until the pains are relieved and the jaws are numb.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	Then let them chew what they want easily, and do not exert themselves to open their mouth while eating or drinking until the jaws are completely numb and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	"And if the two jawbones cannot be properly reduced within an hour and are not returned to their proper place, then fever and chills will ensue, sometimes with diarrhea, and occasionally with vomiting of bile."
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is a lost cause;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many die within nine days upon whom it occurs.
de la forcelle	"of dislocation of the jawbone at the angle"
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	"The angle [of the jaw] cannot be dislocated towards the cheek from within and from below the chin, but sometimes it can be dislocated backwards, which is easily felt."
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the treatment is that the patient lies often on their back and extends their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	And then press firmly at its place with your hand, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	Then put on the bandage and wrap it tightly.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	And the shoulder blade that is towards the back cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	If not, and if it dislocation again, reset it into its place as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then put on the bandage and wrap it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And likewise is reset the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	"of dislocation of the shoulder blade"
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder dislocates in only three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	One way is that it dislocation at the part of the socket below;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	And the second way is at the part of the breastbone;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	And sometimes it dislocates above, but this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	And the shoulder does not dislocation behind, nor inward for the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And many times it dislocates downwards towards the buttock, especially in those who are fatty, for it happens suddenly.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	For those who have enough flesh, it hardly jumps or goes back in place.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	"Sometimes, however, some men suffer a blow or a fracture and the shoulder becomes inflamed with heat, causing them to believe that it has been dislocated."
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is therefore necessary that you examine it until you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	It is known that dislocations are when they are downwards towards the buttock, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, which you will find clearly evident between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and when touching below the buttock, you will feel the top of the shoulder like an egg.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	The patient cannot bring their hand to their neck nor move it in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not concealed because you will find it clearly by touching.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	Only this kind of dislocation can be reduced when it is recent or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the manner is such that the servant lifts the hand of the patient upwards, then places his thumbs underneath the elbow, and forcibly lifts the joint upwards to its place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And the servant raises the hand and extends it upward, then places it underneath;
si venra hastanment.	If it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said within several days afterwards, then the patient must be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And the servant should apply moistening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of mallow, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be applied;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should be supported on his back, and underneath the elbow a pillow of even cloth should be placed, neither too soft nor too hard; then the physician places his heel on the pillow and gently lifts the shoulder joint, pulling the hand of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	And another servant should hold the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	This shoulder returns suddenly, if you see it, reset it according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	And have someone larger than the patient present.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	Let him stand upright facing the side, place his shoulder beneath the arm of the patient, and lift the arm upward so that the patient hangs by it.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And another helper pulls down the patient's hand towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, hang some heavy object with him, and the dislocation will return.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it can also be reset in this other way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And take a long stick and plant it in the ground so that its top is level with the elbow joint, neither too thick nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	Then place the patient on top of it, but ensure there are soft cloths underneath, and have the patient stand along the length of the stick;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then extend the patient's arm downwards on the other side and quickly reset the shoulder joint.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	And if it does not return despite all these things we have mentioned, then perform this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a firebrand of two spans long and four fingers wide, which has a round head to easily enter deeply under the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then tie onto the head of the prepared wood a cloth so that the wood does not burn the patient; then place it under the armpit of the patient
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend the patient's arm over the wood lengthwise, and tie the shoulder onto the wood, then place the arm on one end of a wide plank, with the hand extended downwards, and let the body hang freely on the other side
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint will now be ready.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, however it may be, then place under the armpit a wisp of wool; then put on the emplaster made with flour powder, with incense and egg yolk all around the shoulder, then wrap it tightly under the armpit, and twist the bandage onto the plaster, and bind the hand to its collar, and let the hand remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And he should fast little, so that the limb may rest comfortably, for it will heal more quickly
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then start eating again after five or seven days, and move the limb
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has been forced out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for some other reason, then you must administer cauteries with three openings, as it is described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, but after seven days the dislocation remains and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or weakened
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And know that the joint will never again be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, if it occurs by impulse and extension of hands, one should apply another bandage.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing there comes pain in the member and slowness of movement, then the patient should often apply hot compresses until that pain is alleviated and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	About dislocation of the elbow
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated by force, and returns by force;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and if it has been dislocated in all directions, especially front and back, the dislocation is not hidden, as one can see and feel it well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And it becomes dislocated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick shoulder with the healthy one, so you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder completely
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you must reset it before an abscess appears there, for if an abscess appears there, it would be difficult to reset;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is behind.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	So this dislocation is worse than others and causes great pain, and sometimes death occurs there.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And its restoration is when it can be brought back such that you extend your hand with both of yours;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And spread his arms wide, and with your hands grasp the elbow around, above and below, pushing the joint into place at the base of the thumb or palm until it returns to its proper position;
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he folds his hand towards his hand and presses the elbow that is dislocated against the root of the palm.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong traction;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and have two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold it so that it does not move during the extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then twist the arm in both directions, then after you have wrapped a long and wide doubled cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the surgeon has placed the joint in his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then forcefully push the joint until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, then put on a dry compress with egg yolk, press it firmly, and bind the arm around the patient's neck, leaving it there for some days before removing it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen it with a bandage.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint is not set properly, then recommence the placement and loosen it with a bandage, and leave it thus for several days until it is firmly in place.
puis le deslie.	Then remove the bandage.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if it feels sore after resetting the joint and moves, then bathe and gently rub it and press until it feels soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or place a grease made of mutton fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let it enter into a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when it begins to sweat, gently rub the joint, then replace the grease, and then enter the bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this twice or three times until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see that it is still not well, then place moist fenugreek flour warmed with butter on it and bind it tightly.
si revenra a sa disposition.	If it returns to its position
li dislocation de la main	hand dislocations
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The dislocated joint of the hand returns, and its return is light, more so than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it must be quickly reset to its place in the same wound where it was dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the resetting is done thus: you place the injured hand on a table, and extend it with the help of assistants. The physician then places their palm flat against the front of the joint, pushing until it returns to its proper position.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, you must ensure that it is properly in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then the patient places the back of their hand on a table at full extension and during the reset.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then the patient places their backhand on the table, and the physician places his hand over its joint surface.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then apply soothing plasters to alleviate any heat or swelling, and leave them on without restarting the process.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, nor can you put it back into place after several days, then the joint remains dislocated.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	Nor does any harm come to the patient from this, except that his hand becomes weakened and he cannot grasp anything until
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then you know that the nerves are cut or the arteries
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other injury except pulling with forceps near the case, and sometimes nothing else helps.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	"And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and let it remain so."
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if he cannot move it well, and there is any stiffness, then apply warm water and rub until it is smooth."
de la dislocation des dois de la main	"Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes both hands are dislocated on either side, sometimes at the back of the palm or the front
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then grasp both hands and push the dislocation back into place as far as it goes; then hold the top of the hand steady and tilt it towards the side where it was dislocated
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and let it rest for 2 days, and then set it straight on the third day
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and wrap it up as we have said, and on the fourth day remove the dressing, wash it, and move it gently while keeping it wrapped.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this often, until it is tight, and also do so if the shoulder blade dislocates at the stomach of the hand; and do it in the same way you did before, until it is in place.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And likewise do when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	"Regarding the dislocation of the heel bone of the back"
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	"When the heel bone of the foot or leg is dislocated, or when there are multiple dislocations, there is no treatment for this, as the damage is already done."
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the sign of this is that the joints move suddenly without intention and cannot be held in place, and many times some member, such as both thighs or both arms, becomes paralyzed.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the backbone moves into four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which moves at the rear is called 'gilbositez':
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment for this is to watch if the gilbositez has come from infancy:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no hope of cure or healing.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient doctors proposed various treatments with grand words, but they did not have great benefit in all cases;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have summarized it according to my intention and formed tools in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the swelling that occurs in the chest before, none has health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also that which comes directly to both sides, and one cannot cure it outside except that which comes to the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is necessary for the patient to be laid on their face in one even place, and have something underneath them so they do not bruise.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then stick one ember at the head firmly into the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a band across the patient's buttocks, and another at the hips, knees, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	And two attendants hold the bands, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two embers;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And let them be held firmly together, the ember as we have said, and the physician place their palms strongly on the spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this cure, then take a board three spans long and lay it under the patient's back, with the patient on their side, and put the end of the board under the backbone, then place the middle of the board on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	And let the master put his feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see that, do it to the one that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should place two stakes at the top of the patient's arm and two others towards their feet, with a handspan distance between each stake.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And there should be one hole in each stake where the dislocation occurs, and the stakes should be firmly fixed into the ground so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each of the two stakes should be one turning stake, upon which the rope will turn, and there should be two small stakes a handspan long on either side to help rotate the dislocation.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the rope that is among the stakes to the turning stake towards the top, and the other rope towards the feet at the other turning stake. Each of the assistants should rotate their turning stake with all the ropes, and the master should keep the tension even as we have described.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is equal, then place a drying plaster with plenty of egg, and then the dressings, and then the hot iron of a tablet of three ounces long, that it may touch the place of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a linen thread, as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until he is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if anything prevents recovery at the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications with the hot iron that we have mentioned before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and it is thought that this is dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	And this is the bone that appears, therefore one must not presume to do so:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	For it might bring death upon him.
des dislocations de la hainche	"Dislocations of the hip joint"
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder there comes forth only dislocation, unlike other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	within and without, before and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	And further inward, otherwise dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inward is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee opens wider than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee towards the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the place that is near it is swollen with a hot abscess because the head of the thigh goes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	"And the sign of external hip dislocation is that these accidents are opposite to those mentioned earlier."
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the sign of that which happens in front is that one can hardly straighten their leg to its full extent;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Nevertheless, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if one tries to make them walk, they cannot go forward, and they retain their urine, and the ankle swells, and when they walk, they limp on their heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	"And the sign of posterior hip dislocation is that the knee cannot be extended or bent, and the leg appears shorter than the other one. The ankle is relaxed, and the thighbone is located below the ribs."
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The treatment of this kind of dislocation is that if the dislocation is ancient and it remains in its place, there is no treatment for it;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And there should be no presumption in this.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocation, quickly reset the joint, extend it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	Perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and firmly extend the leg with both hands or have one foot tied above the knee
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another assistant extends their hand in such a way that they place their hands beneath the buttocks, then pulls strongly with one swift movement towards the hip
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And another holds onto the end of the rope.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And they all pull upwards and downwards simultaneously until the patient is lifted off the ground all at once and hangs suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common for four members, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then treat it in a similar manner.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the hip area, place the patient on their healthy side, then put the rope on the root of the hip and the location below the angle, then pull the rope upwards towards the angle and towards the thigh
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then take another helper's arms, and embrace the large bone of the sick hip, and extend it forcefully:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	and it will now return to its place.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	And this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot fix it in the manner we have described, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a soft strong bandage on both heels and knees, and let the sick leg extend two fingers more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then hang it from the top of a post, and have two long arms above the ground
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then instruct one helper to embrace the top of the hip, and have another helper hanging with the patient, who forcefully embraces the hip, for the joint will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation has returned, have the patient lie down as we described for those with gout, and carefully remove the bandage from the sick leg and also from the foot.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two brands: one at the head and another at the feet; then insert one brand between the thighs of the patient in this shape;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And have moistened cloths ready around it so that the patient does not burn; then extend each assistant towards him, and the physician set his hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place a stone on it, and press it as we have said in the chapter on gibbosity (kyphosis), with the patient lying on the sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is before (visible), it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly; as I have said
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and the physician place his pain (palm) on top of the sick joint; then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is behind, then it is not necessary to extend the sick leg downwards or lift it up; rather, it must be as if the hip were dislocated backwards, as we have said regarding childbirth on both hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and lie him on his face; and stretch out the linen as we have said earlier, and everyone must press on the joint together.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	And it will be ready when the patient extends their legs, and they are even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then join the thighs together, place the splint, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And let it rest for three or four days, then untie it and place the splint on top;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, bind them as before, and leave them for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then untie it, and let him walk gently until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee joint can be dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	That is to say, inside and out, and behind;
et ne desalue point devant.	and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is this: tell the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not articulate with their thigh, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the reduction of all three kinds is this: have the patient sit up straight, extend their leg if possible, and place your back against their face, and place their foot on yours;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your thighs, then strongly bend both sides of the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another assistant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign that it is well put back is when he can easily move his leg at the hip.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply the plaster on top, and bind the leg to the thigh, tying them together tightly for three or four days, then untie it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not let the patient move until the member is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not yet straight, then extend it strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is straight.
de la dislocation dou talon	Dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	"The heel is sometimes twisted and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign that it is well put back is when the ankle is swollen and sticks out on the side where it was dislocated
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The reduction should be easy, and one can easily extend the arm with both hands when it is only slightly moved.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, you should make the patient sit upright, and one assistant should pull him forward by the leg above the ankle
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then stretch it out upwards, and gently place the foot up high.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	And do this twice, as we have said, while pushing and pulling the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it stays in place, that's good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If not, then start again, for it will dislocate again.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it still cannot stay in place, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly plant a pole in the earth between their thighs, and tie straps around so as not to hurt the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then two ministers grasp the thigh, while another extends the foot towards them or lies down on it, so that they can tie it at the ankle joint.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister stretches out equally, and let the pole be between the patient's thighs to hold them down when stretching out.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then the physician gently places his hands on the dislocation and another minister grasps the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return to its place.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it reaches its peak, then place the plaster and bandages on it, press firmly, tie the foot to the leg, and keep watch over the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the bindings are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings get loose, then press firmly;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he walks before that time, there is no certainty that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if inflammation comes afterwards, then you must calm it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed."
des dois	about the elbows
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	"When the elbows are dislocated, they should be gently reduced without force, and this is an easy thing to do."
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any knot of the back of the foot, then have the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table entirely straight, and place your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	Then when it is even and nothing opens up, place two-footed table under the sole of the foot, then press firmly, leave for three days, then untie.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	About wounds and dislocations at the same time
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When an injury comes with the dislocation and one wants to reset it, many times the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	Do not be presumptuous in treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and careful, not hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And at the beginning of treating hot inflammation, use soothing remedies, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place before the inflammation becomes hot.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and once the limb is in place, then apply soothing remedies for hot inflammation and treat the wound with drying ointments as necessary;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is also a fracture along with the dislocation and small bones dislocated, set them, and do what we have said for simple bone fractures;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And guard yourself from entering a path of fear, as I have said, for it is against your movement according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your arms and body.
