O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, my dearest son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its fulfillment, and I have brought it to an end through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came upon me to envision that I would complete it with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is much neglected in our region and has been entirely suppressed everywhere, the science has therefore perished and its strength lies only in the small descriptions found in books which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and the science is ignored.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Now it seems to me that I wish to revive her along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will bring together the shapes of the fire irons for cauterization and other instruments of the work with the arrangement of their declaration and preparation as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And therefore, whoever engages in this must rise to the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of members, their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and how they move and remain at rest, and where their exit points are located.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And therefore Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, but with the work it is little.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that anyone who is not knowledgeable about the things said before should be careful not to fall into error and kill people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Thus have many wished in vain for these who meddle with this science but are abandoned without skill or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish physician who cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman and cut the arteries in the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And another physician who removed a stone from a man's eye, the stone being large.
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	So he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they tried to cut into him he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And saw another physician who treated our duke whose leg was broken; and with the break there was a wound,
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the physician, full of ignorance, held the break upon the wound like stars with great force, and did not leave any bandage on the wound, leaving it thus until the end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	And he commanded that it should not be unbound,
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and so it remained until the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot went to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come unbind the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I had unbound it, he felt at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the pathways of corruption were already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who burst an inflamed aposteme and then set it on fire through the wickedness of his ignorance.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is free from melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, surgery where there is danger in many situations;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore it is necessary that you guard yourself so that foolish physicians cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	So take up your weapons with confidence, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through God's grace you may come to salvation and be praised;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave fearsome illnesses to those skilled in difficult cases;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And remove your weapons from what causes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not undertake the treatment of a serious illness unless you are summoned as a wise physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, arranged from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	And about the shapes of instruments, and the iron implements of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cups and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar matters;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	And it is arranged with the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about reducing dislocations and twists, and similar matters;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	And it is arranged from the head to the feet, with the shapes of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we begin discussing the work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality of each temperament and its benefit or harm.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of the patient and his harm are the longest speech and most subtle knowledge, and secret responses;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	And about this spoke most of the wise men, and they agreed upon it.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	And few are their words sufficient to me, for I dread length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery universally helps any complexion where there is matter, whether it be one of two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	That is to know, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a complexion that is both hot and dry with matter, some say that cautery is great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	That cautery is not good for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat hot illnesses with heat, nor with dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And he who said the opposite said that cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases that occur in men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body and moisture of man to the temperament of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any case, do not meddle with fire cautery except he who has experienced it, and knows through long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and the causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and the space of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	Of other constitutions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all physicians agreed upon the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know this, son: cautery along with fire is one of the secrets of cure and has greater benefit than cauterizing with burning medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and does not harm any other member if it is applied to the one being cauterized, except for those that are named otherwise.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Hot medications travel from limb to limb by dilation and cause severe illnesses there.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And sometimes they kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, due to its heat and goodness of substance, does not harm unless there is excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And these things I have found by experience and the length of service and study that I have devoted to this art, based on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And therefore I apologize for the length of my speech, as I do not wish to deprive you of the secret that is hidden in fire and its qualities of operation, how it expels diseases from the body, as philosophers say when demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Take this into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	"And know, son, that they agreed upon when cauteries ought to be performed, and chose priests."
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	I say that cautery is beneficial at all times because the harm that comes from it is mitigated by its aid;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And especially, if a cautery is necessary for urgent pains that cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear son, as foolish doctors do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	For a disease healed by cautery has no relapse;
et il le dient ensi;	and that is what they say;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicines that change complexion and dry up the humors causing pain; they are worth more than medicines for their speed of effect and power of operation.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And sometimes a disease comes upon a patient according to his complexion, the location of the disease, and its strength;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and excesses gather within him due to the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are applied where there is little excess or moisture, such as dental cauteries for pain, and similar treatments, from which such pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	But this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the tail of medicine, which is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	But they do not believe that cauteries are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are called the tail of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in any disease and they do not work, then we apply cautery, which is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	"So it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, but not according to the intentions of foolish physicians."
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauteries of gold are milder than those of iron, and they said this for the quality of gold and its preciousness.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	And they said that the place of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have tried it and found that in some people, it is true.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And cauteries of gold are milder than those of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	Furthermore, when you heat a tool of gold, you do not know how hot it is just by its golden color, and it cools down quickly.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	And if it is heated too much;
si font au feu;	If they put it on the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Thus there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	"And for these reasons we use iron cauteries that we have better adapted to our work."
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	"Now I have arranged this chapter from beginning to end so that it may be easier to find."
dou cautere olivaire	"about the olive cautery"
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	"This cautery is beneficial for moistness and coldness on the head, and there are two kinds of it that are made because of an illness called 'sodicity' and because of many humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears, and for excessive sleepiness, toothache, sore throat, and especially all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sciatica, apoplexy, and similar illnesses."
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The shape of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a laxative drink for three or four nights, depending on their strength, age, and constitution.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	And then make him/her vomit at his/her head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	Then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his chest;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	Afterward, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And where your middle fingers meet, apply pressure and then heat the cautery called 'olivary', of which this is the shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	Place it on the marked spot, and move downwards while gently pressing your hand in a circular motion.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	Then lift your hand gently, and check if you see bone protruding slightly;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you do not see it, then recommence the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	Then take some wool, and put in softened cotton inside it, and place on the wound for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	then place a soft linen cloth soaked in butter on top;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	And leave it on until the inflammation has subsided;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmacon' until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges itself;
et por ce si aide mues.	Therefore, change dressings often.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	"And some of these people say that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and heal it."
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that one should leave the cautery on long enough and press hard enough to abrade as much bone as a thread used by women in their spindles, so that the humors may be expelled more freely;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and the wound should be left open for a prolonged period;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	then it should be dressed and bandaged.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauteries do not seem to me to be entirely good, except perhaps in some men where there is an appearance of fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should leave this to him;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head is weakened by prolonged, natural solutions as we have shown in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And even when the head of a patient is naturally weak, the first type of cautery seems safer and gentler to me, and it is this one that I now use together.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	"about chronic headache"
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When the head suffers from chronic pain that lasts a long time, the patient should use ointments and pills called 'cochiae', and also remedies for the head, oils, and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	And even if one performs the cautery we mentioned earlier, it is not helpful.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Be wary if the patient's head is strong in nature and is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Then cauterize it with that cautery we mentioned earlier, but a little less intense.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	Afterwards make a cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone as we have said before, and make one cautery at the place called "vessels";
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	And that is the place where you apply cupping glasses;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	And raise your hand so that you do not see until reaching the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels much greater pain with this cautery than with others; I will speak about it elsewhere.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	And the cauteries on the horns must be more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle of the head, and this is the reason:
dou cautere dou chief	"about the cautery of the head"
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head and extends to the eye, and the head is purged by moistifying medicines, and all the other treatments that I have mentioned in the section on diseases are applied, but none of it helps.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Then apply cauteries in two ways: namely with hot medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cautery with hot medicine is done by taking an almond and removing its skin, crushing it into a paste, applying it to both temples where the pain is felt, then making an incision in the temple so that you can place the almond paste under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it is reset, then let it rest and hold it steady thus for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	Then release it and draw out the pain with garlic juice, leaving the wound thus for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then apply a piece of cotton soaked in butter until it can be pulled out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After applying the salve until it heals;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see that some medicines burning are needed, then treat them according to what I have written in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery should be applied in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron from which this shape is made:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because its head is shaped like a hood with one small bend in the middle.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful spot; then hold your hand and gently rotate the fire until half of the blade of the heart-shaped end is heated.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	Then lift your hand so that the artery does not burn; it is underneath, and much blood flows abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterwards, apply cotton moistened with oil, placing it on the spot for three days.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then I place moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is clean.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you wish to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery called "cultellare," on its tip only, beware of touching the artery in this hemorrhoid that is not ancient.
de emigraine	of ulcer
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When treating hemorrhoids as mentioned earlier in the chapter on divisions of diseases, and it is not improving, and you see that the previously mentioned cauteries of medicine and iron do not help, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And seize upon the wound a line half the length of two fingers, and remove your hand once, ensuring that you do not touch the artery or reach the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And beware of the mandible that moves when chewing, and ensure that you only touch what moves, so that there is no spasming for the patient. Also beware of bloodletting from the artery when it is cut, or if cutting causes great fear, especially for someone who is not skilled or experienced in this matter.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	And let the work remain unfinished.
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if these cauteries do not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize it near the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see this, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery, with a cautery that has two blades.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And these cauteries are better and more helpful than those.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	For pain in the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When cold pain comes to the ear, and one has opened there medications dissolving and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	Then puncture all around the affected ear, or around both ears if the pain is in both, and move away a bit from the root of the ear, then mark the spot where you will begin.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	And make ten punctures around each ear.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Only tortures which move with a flow of blood ought to be treated by cauterization.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	And do not perform cauterizations on similar conditions that come from dryness and spasm of the nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When treating this condition of torturous movement with blood flow, and it is not effective through hydrides and purgations of the head and gargarisms, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, another a little behind the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery on the healthy appearing part, and make a cautery incision above the ear slightly below its horn, and another one on the temple about the length of a pea;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	And leave the cautery in place until half of the coal is burned.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	This is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is similar to the knife we have placed before, but it is somewhat more refined, and the knives should be slightly thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the place as I said earlier, until it is clean.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then apply four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one where it is called 'vessels' as we have said earlier, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And they should be treated as we have said earlier.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, give the patient large ointments and pills to cleanse the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	Then raise the head of the patient entirely, and place on the occiput the plaster of mustard that is written about in the treatise on plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is the method of cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	If you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If he is healthy thus, it is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if he is not [healthy], apply three cauteries on him from the head down to the neck, placing each two fingers' breadth apart.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And treat it as you would others; and if you see them joining together, and the patient is suffering, apply one cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if necessary, apply two more on the two horns, and treat until it is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	And let the cautery that is called 'olivary' be like I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hairs and of what we have mentioned before
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After raising the patient's head, apply a cautery to it and to each horn, one behind and three on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, apply four cauteries on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And let him wait until the thickest hair has burned away; then raise your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the cure, once it is healed, use the cautery called 'olivare', which we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epilithic should only apply fire cautery to those who are phlegmatic. First, one must modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in previous sections when the patient is large and able to tolerate medical treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it's a child who cannot tolerate this, perform a gargle and chewing motion with softened foods often to cleanse the throat.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	Then place the king's head in the middle, and perform the cautery as we have said before, and cauterize the vessel and each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is strong and patient, perform cauteries as I have said for those with paralysis and weakness of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, using an olive-shaped cautery as I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, one should apply a single subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the excesses or corrupted moisture are caused by melancholy and produce thick phlegm, then apply as many cauteries as we have described for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the excess is inclined towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist due to melancholy, then give them something to drink that cleanses the brain according to what is written earlier in this section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	Then place the head of the patient king;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	Then make a linen towel well-woven like a circle, and place it on the head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	And the patient should sit cross-legged, being held firmly in all places;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	Afterwards, present the linen, and use old sheep butter.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	And warm it gently over fire so that the dough can bear being dipped into it.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	Then empty the circle from within around the head and let it cool.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this to the patient once each week with another good regimen until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you wish to cauterize wounds by making several pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery moistens the brain increasingly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then place cotton dampened in butter and goose grease on top.
de l’awe des eulz	Here begins a chapter on the eye.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When it first comes to the eyes as described in the division by signs I've mentioned, then begin and give the patient something purifying the head, keeping away all moistures, and make them sweat or take many baths fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	Then he commands him to lay back his head and makes a cautery on the head, making two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the eye is in both eyes together, or one cautery if it is in one eye.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	Then cut all the veins and arteries that are below the heart with each cautery, making the cautery long according to the width of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision of cauterization, how you should stretch it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes one makes a cautery or hot iron underneath the two hind legs.
dou cors des larmes	Regarding the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears from the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins or near the arteries that appear on the forehead;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and it is seen that they are due to cold, humid surplus, then one makes the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the eyebrow descending towards the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	Make a cautery on the head, and two cauteries on each temple, and two cauteries or hot irons underneath the two hind legs.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if more is needed, then cauterize it profusely above the eyebrow at each small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Regarding the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat him according to what we have said in the section on division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of decoction of leeches.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king, burn with the iron where the olive oil cautery is made.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on both sides, a little below the eyebrows.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	Be careful not to touch the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When paper made from oil is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the shape
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see fit, make two cauteries on both sides as long as the eyebrows are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And do not remove your hand until one-third of the paper has burned according to the method I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Regarding the eyelashes that touch the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes the eyelashes turn inward and prick the eye, in which case cauteries are made in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Namely, either by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and are even, then put the patient on your knee;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After that, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure like the mirror of Myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign near the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then put a ball of cotton soaked in egg white and powdered myrtle on the eye, then heat the cautery, which is shaped like this:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	Then cauterize along the figure you have drawn, little by little many times, until the skin is burned at that spot;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the sign of the health of the work is when you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up at the point of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then raise your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if afterwards the hairs grow back, and the paper becomes softened, then begin the cautery on that same spot again, just as you did at first;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs are lacking, cauterize them until the skin returns to its natural level, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	And for the burning medical cautery, instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even. Then make a template of parchment in the shape of a bay leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take equal parts (1 drachm each) of French soap and live coal ash, grind them together thoroughly;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make it quickly, so that it does not cool. Then spread the mixture onto your template in the shape of a bay leaf, and place it on the skin near the eyes;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	If the patient needs treatment for one eye only, work on that one; if both eyes are affected, treat them both.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	And place a moistened cotton ball under the eye.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And hold the patient's head steady in your hand. Place your two fingers on the medication and press gently. Move them every time the patient feels a burning sensation, as they will feel it like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine with your fingers.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the biting has passed, then lift the hot iron and see if the paper lifts as well, as it would have done by constraint of fire or by incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And if so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	However, if not, then apply more of the medicine to the spot where it has not opened, so that your work is even, and your eyes sharp.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place softened cotton in butter until the heart's fire is extinguished; afterwards, dress the wound with ointment called 'dyafenis' and others, until it is clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must guard your work carefully, so that no medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, then recommence the medicine on that spot softened by the paper properly, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after which dress it until it is healed
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And this is the form of the poultice for the eye:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that men's eyes differ in size and smallness, and according to this are your constraints.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and the direct path should not be blocked for one who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Here is the treatment for fistula by cauterization:
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in our divisions of diseases, but your treatment does not help,
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put their head in your hand;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	And have his servant hold his head between your hands so that it does not move or turn its head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	Then put moistened cotton in egg white or in juice of purslane on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	Then heat the cautery which is shaped like this:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	And pointed at the head like the shape of a pigeon's feather, so that the cautery is sharp;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	If you wish, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, it should also be like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	However, the one that is pointed is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	Then press on the fistula if it is open, and remove the pus, and dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	And if it is closed, open it, and draw fire from the bowels
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	Afterwards put the hot cauterizing iron on it, and keep your hand on the cautery at the side of the eye nearest the nose, so that your hand does not go mad.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and burn it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery down to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then apply the cautery again once more, and do so a second time if necessary, and leave it on for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	Then put on cotton moistened in butter, and continue the drying salve treatment until it is healed. If forty days pass without healing, apply a corrosive ointment until the bone is exposed
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	And follow the king's recipe according to what comes afterwards in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is another manner of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand that this is about a fistula, and find its location
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Then insert into the opening gently this thin thing: here is the form
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	And they do to the quantity of three-fifths of a penny.
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	And hold your hand firmly over the wound, so that the patient does not move his nose at all, lest the molten lead flow into his eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	And it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient moistened cotton wool in an egg shell or in water;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The lead, if applied correctly, heals the site of the fistula, and the sinew by miraculous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer a probe to the nose and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body of the nose.
des crevaices en levres	"for cracks in lips"
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on lips which are called "hairs", especially on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks which we have mentioned in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat up a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And quickly pour it into those cracks until it reaches the source;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then dress the site with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the boil on the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it becomes rotten and round, is inflamed, and turns into a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said with incisions, but it does not help at all;
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	Then you must apply the cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After the wound or opening of the fistula, keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches its bottom, and at the back of it.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this once or twice after the treatment that we have mentioned in treatments, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	And if it is cured thus, that is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	And if not, then you must expose the site and remove the rotted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	on the mobility of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is not effective, then place the patient's head in your hand;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	Afterwards heat the cautery whose shape will be described below so that you can put a band around the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and quickly place the hot cautery inside and hold your hand there until the patient feels heat reaching the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	Afterwards, remove your hand and continue using the cautery as you wish;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	Afterward, let the patient fill their mouth with salted water, and hold it for an hour with rich force.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And thus the moving tooth is made firm, and the softened gum constrained, and corrupt moisture dried.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	If toothache comes from coldness, where there is coldness or wind, and medicines do not help, then it is necessary to use cautery in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	And cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cautery with butter is done thus: take fresh butter and put it on an iron or brass spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	Then take cotton, wrap it around the tip of a tent (i.e., make it into a small cone), dip it in melted butter, and quickly place it on the aching tooth; hold it until it cools.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And repeat this often until its effectiveness reaches the root of the tooth. Then, if you want to use cold butter and cotton, dip it in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth, and hold an iron heated over fire close enough for its heat to reach the bottom of the tooth without touching it.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cauteries are of such kind that you should take one made of iron or brass, and it should be thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, of which the form will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down;
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be relieved that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then apply the hot iron;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And perform a cautery on whichever head you wish, according to your ability.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	And this is the form of the cautery iron:
des scrophules	scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the hair cautery of which the form comes later, and it should have two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	Place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice until it reaches the base of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to its size, and leave it on for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	Place moist cotton soaked in butter until the burning sensation is gone.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterward, treat with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cauterizing iron:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture prevails over the channels of the lungs, especially when it arises from a cold constitution, then the patient should be made to cough up phlegm first with solvent medications.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	Afterward, apply a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go too high up towards the throat, and only singe it a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	Afterward, apply another cautery at the junction of the neck and head of the spine, using the cautery called 'clavile' as shown above.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heal the joint as we have said before until it is whole.
de la toust	Here's how you can translate "de la toux" into English:
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	And when all diseases of the lung are from cold dampness, and the patient has no fever or cough, and the disease is chronic, then apply two cauteries to the fleshy part near the wound.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	And place the second cautery between the breasts, between the two breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	And let the cauteries be of the type called 'clavile,' according to the shape described above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	If you see it, apply a cautery at its tip, that is called 'pointe,' of which the shape is described above in the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And let there be up to thirty points, or however many around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterward heal the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be of three rows according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, perform them in three places.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the displacement of the shoulder joint
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder blade is dislocated due to moisture and is put back in place but cannot remain there and returns and dislocates again with even a small movement, as we have experienced it, then you must first reduce the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Then have the patient lie on their back and side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	then lift the heart that is inside the titillation with the fingers of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	And if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery that has two branches, the form of which is thus:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	And cauterize the lung until it pierces to the side, and bring the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	And therefore cauterization is done with the cautery that has three rows, so that the figures of cauterization are six;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves are arranged according to the fineness of a thread, and it is the form of the cautery that has three rows:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is joined onto this one nerve, so there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	Afterwards place on the cautery pieces of broken porridge with salt;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	afterward let the patient rest and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavile, or many cauteries pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is sound.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach so that they alter its nature, and catarrh is multiplied in it, and usual methods of treatment do not help, then the patient must be turned onto his back, extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Then apply three cauteries to the lower part of the breastbone with the quantity of two fingers' width at each cautery on the upper end, and two cauteries outside the two ribs so that the figure of the cauteries forms a triangle with equal distance between them so they do not join together when they discharge pus;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And let the cautery burn so deeply that it reaches the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see cauterization with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	And whoever fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and pressing on the stomach one point according to the quantity that you see fit;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Then cauterize with the entire cautery called 'the point'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment that we have discussed previously, let it be without wound.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When pain comes from coldness and moisture and excessive windiness in the liver, so that it is greatly altered from its natural composition by excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and if the patient is treated with what we have said in division [treatment] and it does not help him, then the patient must be made to vomit.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	And place three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the ribs of the chest come.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	And let there be space between each cautery equal to two fingers.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	And the cauteries on the long parts of the body should not have too much pressure applied from your hand throughout the cautery.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	And only burn half of the skin, and let the patient lie down on their right side.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	And if they cannot do this, then they should lie down, extend their legs, and raise their arms.
et c’est li forme:	This is the method:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if it is your wish, then cauterize these cauteries with the scalpel if you are skilled and wise in this art; but be careful not to burn all of the skin, as you would dry out the whole body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And let it not come close to the eye, for the skin is very delicate there, and you will see this clearly.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the omentum:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it's within the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too intense.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it is under the skin, extreme pain is felt.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	Then when this treatment fails according to doctors, the patient must be placed on their head.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then press down on the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, of which here is the shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	Then cauterize with the cautery until the flesh is burned, and let it come to a boil until all the matter comes out.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After that, according to the cure of the roots until it's healed.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And only those who have studied medicine extensively for a long time should use this cautery, and through whom many of these diseases have been cured at least once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can boldly act, nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Regarding the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that for pleurisy, cauteries made from the roots of aristologus should be used in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long root of aristologus, as large as you can find and dry, and also thick and long like your two fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	And grind it in oil, and take it to the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the navel and the neck, and make two small cauteries a little lower in the part that is below the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And one cautery on the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on both sides of the breast below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And do not press your hand, but open it as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	Some ancient authors say that some people used to heat a cautery like a razor and place it between the ribs until it reached the boil.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And when it hurts, as we have said regarding the boil on the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this case, there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Regarding the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse with the methods that we have said in the chapter on treatments, and it does not help, then there are three ways of cautery which are all good:
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	There is also a method such that you make three or four cauteries, lining them up according to the length of the mouse's body, following the shape of the liver cautery we mentioned earlier.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	And do not rush your hand for the entire cautery; let the patient often lie on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	And another method of cauterization is to heat the cautery which has two threads, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And lift the heart which is located at the breast, where the edge of the patient's coat comes towards the left; and let the elevation by which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	Then put in the two burning threads until the heart is pierced on the other side; then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you wish, cauterize with all of the cautery having three threads.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has thrown off corruption for a long time, it is better than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery should not be used on someone with dropsy except in the manner called "ascites.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the throat, one on the stomach, one on the liver, and one on the breast, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the nipple.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	And let the cautery be held close to the point of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time to throw out corruption, and do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing would hasten, and both intentions will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the one we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And that for the back be olive-shaped, according to what has been placed here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go too deep in by force, lest you spill out the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Then make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the shinbone.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And let the cautery be long, one under the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the thigh.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	And let cauteries burn unchecked without being treated, until the boil discharges.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After treating other wounds as we have described.
de la menoison	Of epilepsy
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When coldness and moisture cause problems in the stomach, rendering the retaining and digestive powers of the stomach and intestines powerless, so that they cannot be cured by any remedies;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	And you see the patient suffering greatly and having strong virtues, then perform a great cautery on the stomach according to what is written earlier about the cautery of the stomach.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And four small cauteries around the navel like a small key-cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abounding and the patient suffering greatly, then make one cautery on the point of the chin, one cautery on each ear, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one; for treatment is helpful when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old with thick cold moist corrupt humors, and have been treated by division as we have said but there is no improvement, then perform cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Three on the spine of the back, one directly below the shoulder-blades in a triangular pattern, and two below the navel.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	If you think his stomach is cold and the flesh not cooked, and you see the face swelling, then apply one large fire cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, another on the liver, and another on the spleen using a pointed cautery.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery remain for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating it, heal it until it is clean.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the fleshy growth called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you grasp the boil, first heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it completely burning on that grasped boil;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	And let your hand remain there until the cautery reaches the root of the vein where blood flows.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there are many boils, cauterize each one as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	afterwards, treat them with healing ointments until they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on boils, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	Of poorly-treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	If the patient cannot endure incision or opening, which we will discuss in its proper place, then there comes such a disease that can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes to someone and it is inflamed and emits corruption and corrupt moistures, you should prove it with a thin probe entirely throughout its length, and make sure that you know the entire length of the probe.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	Then heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to how much tent is inside it, and recommence with the cautery until the rotted and corrupted flesh is burned, once, or twice, or three times depending on what is needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And guard against burning the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or intestines, beware of this place; and do not perform cautery except in a fleshy area; consider that it is not passing.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After treating the place until it is clean, and if the wound is healed, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is entirely healthy.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the matter is not removed, know that the place is putrefied, and the bone is rotting at its core.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And thus as one of those things which we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	de la maladie dels rengs (Occitan)
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and there is great windiness, and no sign of menstruation appears, then you must perform cautery on the kidneys on either side with the clavicle cautery that we have spoken of before.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize it midway, there will be three cauteries in a row.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	And when the bladder is weak and cold due to moisture so that the patient retains urine, then make two cauteries on each side above the bladder where the pubic hairs begin, each cautery being as long as a hazelnut.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And make one cautery behind the back, or two if needed.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the cauteries be shaped like a crow's foot according to the shape mentioned above.
de la marris	Of the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the womb is cold and moist, preventing conception, and the flowers are corrupted with late terminations;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	And when they do come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	Then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the pudendum as we have said regarding the bladder cautery, and two cauteries behind the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	And let the cauteries be shaped like a crow's foot, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hair
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When viscous moisture descends to the box of the hip joint, causing it to move from its place, the sign is that one thigh appears longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	And the location of the joint's departure is found, so you should cauterize the patient around the hip socket with an iron cautery shaped like a circle, and mark around the socket in front of where it turns, so that the socket lies within the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	And let the cauteries be such as those used for cauterizing the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these cauteries are not available, then make three large olive-shaped ones; let the cauteries be as long as all the fingers.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply the treatment until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of pain in the hair
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the hip socket due to coldness and dampness, and despite being treated according to what we have said earlier, the patient is not cured, and the disease is chronic:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then it is necessary for you to purge the patient of thick humors using foul-tasting pills or other similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After that, perform the cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	And there are two ways to perform the cautery:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	That is, using burning medicines together, or fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery has many methods, one of which is:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	Thus: cauterize over the haunch bone with three triangular cauteries in this shape, and make them deep and wide. Leave a space of two fingers between each cautery; let the cauteries be olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Sometimes, one cauterizes in the middle on top of the haunch bone, resulting in four cauteries arranged like this:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you wish to do so, cauterize along the circular line we mentioned earlier for dislocating the haunch;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire haunch, and all the fat around the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner that is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh and does not reach to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes down to the thigh and the leg, apply two cauteries where the patient feels the pain, and one cautery above the ankle on the left side.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	And let the cautery be made of steel, and let the thickness of the heart be burned.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the patient feels that the pain extends down to two fingers from the foot or close by, cauterize there three points or four with the cautery called 'points'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if more is needed, do likewise.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it seems that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, apply a circular cautery with great care in all your cauteries, ensuring you do not burn too deeply and damage the nerves and large arteries, causing further harm to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who performed a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot likewise, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach remedy that caused death
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, perform a cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	The wise men say in the cautery for the haunch that it should be made of iron and be as thick at the tip as a goose quill or slightly less, and have spaces between each other, with one space equal to the thickness of a barley grain.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the tweezers be made of two parts, and also like tongs, with one handle made of iron.
et c’est li forme:	And this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And it should be heated until it is all red-hot and glowing, then place it on the box of the sick person's hair, and turn it towards the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and cauterize once with one cautery, and leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	And then make an emplaster of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasis says that we refrain from using this cautery because of its intense heat, and few people use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	nevertheless, those who can endure it are benefited by good cauteries.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cautery of burning medicine is this: you should make an instrument with tweezers, into which the edge of the door descends, and it should be made of bronze or iron on one side, long enough for its width, and at the top there are two noses, each with the thickness of a finger between them;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	And let them be opened wide and above, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	Next, place the box of the comb upon the sick person lying on their healthy side, and then press your hand firmly upon the box of the comb;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Next, place between the two circles of hot iron, heated in the fire for one hour, and let the patient endure its warmth and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it finds therein a biting like that of fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the biting has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot comb, leaving it on for three days, and apply butter until the blackness of the scorch is removed;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	And leave it on for three more days until corruption appears;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this would be the final aid after treatment with ointments, until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make one instrument that draws blood according to what you did for the comb.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And this is the method of hot cautery, which I have written about in my treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and live lime, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	If there is a small hole there, then let the point of a razor enter it;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place thereupon another pot well stoppered, and put upon it alkali and warm water, until you have two pots full of the powders which you can easily grasp with your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it thus until hot water and liquid descend into the well-stopped pot, then take all that water and pour it upon hot alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be very hot and ready for use in many medical operations and cauteries of other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs the work of fire and has other medicines with which one can cauterize the hair well, such as pitch and honey of almonds and hot water with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was healed from the pain of his hair and sciatic vein, and he praised it greatly, saying that no other treatment was used, and he was healed at once when this cure was performed, as told hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And thus you should take some fresh and dry verdigris [copper(II) acetate], grind it well with a bit of fat, and apply it on the thigh, knee, and calf where the pain resides, and bind it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter a bath until his body is a little warmed up, and lay him in bed, and the pain will all go away and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such cauteries except after evacuating blood from the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's bile, it helps greatly;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And this is how the cautery should be made.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen, grease it with old oil, and place it on the depression between the big toe of the foot and the one called the 'fossicle'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry goat bile and heating it on fire until it becomes charcoal, you should place it on wool and let it cool.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	And repeat this process again until you think by sight that the heat reaches the thigh and the pain ceases.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	And this type of cautery is called 'goat's cautery'.
de la dolor dou dos	**of the pain in the back**
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or impact or excessive bleeding, or from similar matter spread coldly, in none of these cases does fire cautery help except for that which comes from the infusing of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary that after the patient has been relieved with fetid pills or similar ones, you perform three rows of cauteries marked with ash on their back where the pain resides, and in each row five or more cauteries according to the strength and amount that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And let the cautery be made according to the cautery called 'poins';
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make 3 or 4 cauteries on the median cautery of the shoulder in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Often this disease comes to small children, and the sign of its onset is that they have short breath when they stand up, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	And you will find on the lower spine of the back, near the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to cure it, cauterize with the cautery of a cell according to this shape:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cauterizing iron grips evenly each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish to do so, cauterize around the spine at intervals of two or three lines, with the points close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Then cleanse the wound until it is sound according to what we have said, and make sure you do not apply cautery in a place where there is an abscess near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	de la dolor des jointes
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pains in the joints are caused by moistures that spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes into the feet, which physicians properly call 'podagra,' and when it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured by medications, then it should be treated with cauteries in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make many cauteries around the ankle joint, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick the surface of the foot, perform cautery with the cautery called "the point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains reach the knees and other joints, which happens often, make 3 or 4 cauteries on each knee, olive-shaped on both sides.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need more, then do more, but keep your hand steady until the brand of the heart's blade is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then make punctures around the fistula two lines away.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there remains no pain at the base, then make punctures on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if pains reach to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and have the patient keep a good regimen and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	But if you provide good care and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	"Treatment for a broken nose:"
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When rupture comes to the joints, and the bowels descend to the thighs, and it is recent, then you must ensure that when you see him being treated, he does not eat on that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	And let him use things that relieve the belly, so that the wind descends from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	Then have him sit on his back between your hands, and tell him to pull his ankle until the bowels are restored, and then bind them at your two elbows, and press firmly below the rupture on the bone of the wrist, and that is one sign that should resemble half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat the cautery of which this is the shape
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it is white and casts shadows
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the intestines to their place.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	And the minister must hold his hand so that they do not slip backwards.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	And open the patient's thighs widely, and place a cushion and a servant beneath them, and another serving the hands that hold him.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery on the sign with all your strength, holding it with your right hand and pushing until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then begin again with even greater force until you feel the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	And be careful that the intestines do not slip out while applying the cautery
que tu ne le brulasses;	That you do not burn yourself
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	And that by this the patient does not die or suffer some other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	The cauteries for children should be thin according to their size, and those for large individuals should also be proportionately large.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days, treat the wound from the cautery with butter until the burn is healed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After treating other wounds until they are sound, let the patient lie on their back for 40 days so that the wound is properly healed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary to let his ligatures remain loose for a long time, so that his bowels do not protrude when he gets up from bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made bandage, and let him wear it for another 40 days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and have good rest, so that he works little and guards against excessive consumption of drink and food, and against too loud laughing
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And if he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall tell hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	"de la routure du ventre"
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any further, then make a cautery with the cautery rope according to its quantity, and burn one-third of it near the heart
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after treating according to what we have said
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the beginning of the fistula and draw a line along its width above the fistula, and another below it, and then carefully perform the cautery incision.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of past pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, either from falling or being struck, and that pain lasts a long time, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called 'point', and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, power, location, and twistings, and the severity of the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If it is without the first cautery, so much the better;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If that name, recommence another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it should move to the limb that is nearby; therefore you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Of bonesetting
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Some people are helped sometimes by cautery with great benefit, especially those illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When you cauterize the wound, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that corruption will seize the whole patient, then make five cauteries on top of it:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	One at the nape, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	And two on the two horns, and one behind on the little bone;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	Hold your hand so that the cautery reaches to the bone, and so that the scabs come out so that the vapors of thick humors can escape;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	And cauterize upon the mouse as it is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the swelling is spread throughout.
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	And if it is clearly perceptible, then you must cauterize it with those cauteries that we have mentioned at the head, and one cautery near to it, and two cauteries upon the spine of the neck, and six cauteries upon the spine of the back, and one large one upon the chest and another near it, and two upon each shoulder.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	And two upon the ribs, and two upon the breasts of the lungs, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	Be careful not to burn the nerves that are situated under the buttocks.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And sometimes one cautery is made upon the bone of the wrist, and another upon the bone of the stomach, and another upon the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	Know that the more cauteries you apply, the greater the benefit to the patient.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find them in the various ways of using irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the place with flour of doves' feathers mixed with honey, continue treatment until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, but it is not healed, then perform cauteries on the limb according to its size and thickness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cautery be somewhat deep in the flesh near the heart;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the swelling is removed;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	but nonetheless let no one meddle therein unless he knows well the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	"of Albarus"
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the illness called 'albaras' has progressed and medical remedies are of no avail, then cauterize it with a somewhat deep cautery according to the quantity of flesh around the heart until the blackness is removed and its color changes;
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then apply a poultice of wheat flour and lentil flour mixed with rose oil, plantain leaves, donkey's blood, and almond milk, each ingredient taking up one part.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And mix everything together, tie it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it becomes sound.
li cure de chancre par cautere	"Treatment of Chancres by Cautery"
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a cancer begins, and you see it halt, then cauterize it with a fire cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And likewise, the wise said that one should perform cautery in the middle of the cancer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	But I do not think this is good advice, for I fear that it may cause ulceration and corruption, and I have seen this happen before;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And a more appropriate thing to do is to perform cautery around it, using the cautery called 'circular', as we have mentioned in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it is prolonged either because of the excessiveness that it causes or because of the weakness of the patient due to old age (that is, being too elderly), and they have a shortage of blood, or because of the time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	And you shall see it hasten to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	Then cauterize it with many small cauteries, pricking all around:
aprés le laisse ensi.	Leave it like this afterwards.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that it is piercing all the way through the cautery, then heat the cautery which has this shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand on the middle of that illness called 'adubelati' until the cautery pierces the heart, and make the cautery such that the patient feels drawn towards it in such a way that the course of corruption is eased.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the treatment of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness there is called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than the consumption of limbs, for it consumes them just as fire consumes dry logs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate a cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is needed for the location where the disease is.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	Then cauterize it on all sides until you remove all the corruption, leaving nothing of it, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for 3 days, and put on the cauterized places a poultice with oil until the burns of the fire are removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of hot fomentations
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if, after three days, no healthy flesh appears, then it's good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If not, then start cauterizing again where the corruption remains.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this method has sometimes been cured with medicated ointment instead of a fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	However, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the cure using medicated ointment in the section on divisions:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often, at the feet, a disease called "clos" arises, which is a large, broken thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 namely, fire cautery and cautery with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery should be heated like an oven poker, made of good iron to fit the nail evenly with delicate edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	Then place it hot onto the nail and turn your hand around the nail until you reach the tip of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	Leave it like that for 3 days until it begins to discharge pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then apply a poultice of crushed wild mallows with salt, leave it overnight and the nail will fall out along with its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place with ointment around the flesh until it is clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	If they are turned away from the body, which often happens in hands and feet, you must bring a cautery of hot water.
et est en teil maniere:	And it is done in this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a bronze or iron rod or an oven poker and place it on the nail and around it, that is to say, for warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And place the funnel on so that it encompasses all around, then put some warm water inside, and hold your hand tight, and press your hand while turning such that the edge of the funnel reaches the root of the nail, and can find the deep warm water path even to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	And let the patient endure the biting sensation of the hot water for about an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted entirely along with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you remove all those that are on the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When someone shakes due to coldness of the nerves, or quartan fever or others, you must perform four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one between each spine;
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cautery on the foot, and one above the stomach at the 'olive' cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	So it will stop trembling, and the saints of the cold illness will be restored.
des pustules puans	For pus-filled pustules that smell bad
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No part of the body appears more often to emit stinking pustules than those coming from corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	If when they first appear, you must perform a cautery on each head of the pimple:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A fine cauterizing iron made of myrtle wood, from which the tip is heated in fire, or from the long root of artemisia, or from the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further afterwards, but the excess from which they come is severed, and they are clean.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the backside, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of the limb, and similar things
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is very difficult to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And nevertheless when this happens to someone, quickly place your two index fingers on the wound of the vein and press strongly until the blood is quieted under your fingers and no more drops come out
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then place on the fire olive oil cauteries of various sizes, both small and large, until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then take one [cautery], whether large or small depending on the wound and where the artery runs, place it on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, so take quickly another one of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And keep doing this one after another until the bleeding is stopped;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and beware that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stopped well unless it is done by one of the four ways we have mentioned:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	Either by cautery, or by extracting [the arrow] if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by applying medications that have the power to stop bleeding.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And let it be tied and bound properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Which will bring about stopping of bleeding is tying very tightly with rags or putting hot things on top, or similar things, if it profits little or not at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a doctor or medication nearby, then he should place his second finger on the vein wound as we have said, and stretch it well so that it presses firmly upon the wound and the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	And do not move the finger, but wet it with cold water often until the blood is frozen and solidified and pressed.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And make such signs beforehand as are needed for cauteries and medications.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the surgeries of wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which a fire cautery or hot medicine is needed, as well as their causes and instruments and forms of cauteries.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	And I have placed this chapter from head to foot in the previous one, and I will go along the same path in this chapter so that what one wants may be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And before I begin this one, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter there are often evacuations of blood when opening veins, incising abscesses, treating wounds, extracting arrows, cutting into stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	There is doubt and fear, and death comes to many
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt anything foolish.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many people come seeking treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	such people come from those who tend to their illness so poorly that they die easily due to the harshness of their disease and the severity of its harm.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And one must fear these things.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And there are some who give it meaning and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	wait, I am healed";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but rather put greater care into your honor than in your desire for wealth, and do not open yourself foolishly but wisely only to those whose character you know well and whom you can take in and receive praise from.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognosis and diagnosis in treating your patients so that health may be restored
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And this will help you attain good reputation, glory, and the memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	"Dear son, May Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if it pleases Him to inspire you with the holy breath of His hand, Amen."
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	"I have arranged this chapter in sections for you to consider, according to what is before the chapter on cupping, which I have outlined from beginning to end, so that you may find more easily what you will need."
dou chief plein d’aigue	"full head of water"
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often occurs in children during childbirth, especially when the baby's head is constricted too tightly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And sometimes this occurs due to a hidden cause which one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and it always ended in death for those I saw;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 Therefore, it seems to me that it is worth leaving the work in such cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and each day it swelled so that he could no longer hold up his head;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 And the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture collected under the bone above the hip, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 And if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a wide cut in the middle of the head;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 And let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 Here is the form of the spina bifida:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture has grown more and the swelling is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see these signs: the corners of the head turned upwards on both sides, and water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, but it does not respond to you;
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If thou must cut into the head three cuts according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	After incision, remove all moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After binding the cuts with bandages and powders, put on wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then unbind it and treat the wound with dressings and anointments. Keep the head bandaged evenly, and give the patient dry food from a moist place until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is to observe where the abscess appears largest, and the gathering of water;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	For sometimes it is in front
aucune fois derrier;	Sometimes behind
aucune fois en destre;	Sometimes on the right
et aucune fois en senestre.	And sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Therefore cut where the abscess appears and the collection of water is full, cutting according to your ability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	And beware that thou dost not cut the artery
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	And the windpipe of blood, so that the patient dies from bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	de reume
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "catarrach" in the ears or the nostril, and the disease is chronic, and treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort is to use cauterization along with cutting the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is therefore necessary, when you cover the eyes, that the patient turn his head back.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	Afterwards, rub the spot with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient twist his neck with the whole cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein lies, and its location is behind both ears, and it is rarely missed.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the locations with a point, then cut both sides with a sharp spatula two parts deep until the vein reaches the bone, and this should be done at the wide part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting also like two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then blood flows out continuously upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not appear when felt, then you must measure the width of three fingers, then mark and cut until it reaches the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And about six ounces of blood should be let out, and sometimes a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then examine the wound
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains on the sharp bone tip, if the abscess does not drain well, then compress the wound and bind it, anointing it until it is healed.
de emigrainne	de emigrainne
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When chronic migraine comes with severe catarrh and moisture from tears, and heat in the temples, along with long-standing madness and similar things, and even though medical treatments are used, none of them help, then cut the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is such that the patient shaves the hair from their temples and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it beats well there, and is rarely heard outside except in some men who are excessively cold
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is heard, then the patient presses on their neck with some cloths, then rubs the spot with a rough cloth, and applies warm water to that spot until the artery appears clearly
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Then take the spatula of which this is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then carefully cut through the skin until you reach the artery, then lift it up with tweezers, and carefully separate it from the tissues beneath each part
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	If the artery is slender, cut it with the tip of the nail clipper, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not severed, blood will not flow freely throughout.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw out blood for six days, up to three times;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread so that decay does not reach there before the wound heals, and let the blood flow freely;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize with a knife cautery up to the bone until the head is severed;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is the best work if the patient has no fever and is of warm temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cauteries are helpful in drying out moistures;
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	So they are more helpful for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	For the extraction of arrows, it is necessary that one fills the place with old cotton and then places well-made tents upon it;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are dislocated, they should be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with compresses, until they are healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the artery is severed as often as you work on it, then hasten to cover it with a cautery, or use the place of quicklime and press your hand until the bleeding stops.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you do not have this (quicklime) present, then place your fist on the wound until the blood is frozen, and rinse the wound with cold water until the bleeding stops, and let it be bound as necessary.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And it is easier and quicker in extracting the artery to cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery of two parts, but let the points be well spaced so that their heat lasts longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the material is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there must be one thick spike of space between the two knives, and then when you have indicated the two places with them, heat the iron until it comes close to the bone, and cut the vein in two places.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And let them be kept apart between the two shoulders, for it is not entirely suited to this cautery altogether.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	This is the form of the cautery
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are above the forehead on the head, and it does not help to apply medication there, and you see the face of the sick person reddening, and feel tremors on the forehead like shivering
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and the eyes are thin and moist so that the hairs of the eyelashes have fallen out, and the eyelids are heated and burned by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "treatment for contusion", and this is what you should do to the person who has this illness: let them have hairs on their forehead, then make three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and let one of the incisions be just like two fingers wide all around the forehead going downwards until reaching the nose, and let the other two be on either side of the eyelids above them, but beware of cutting into the arteries that are on both sides above the eyelids
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And keep your hand away from the continuity of the two lower jaws, let each wound be the quantity of three fingers wide across the join.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have ready a piece of sponge and many cloths to wipe away the blood, then insert the spatula two parts from this point: here is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	From the incision that runs from the temple to the second incision.
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And peel off all the flesh that is between the two incisions up to where the sinew is on the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert the tool called "cultellarium" into the first slit, it is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side. This is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the thin blade towards the flesh near the heart, and the blunt blade towards the bone, and press until it reaches the middle fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to those that open from the heart, and then do likewise in the middle furrow up to the other opening.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	Then remove blood evenly, and press the area for blood collection.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then place in each furrow a wisp of old cotton, and put moist cloths soaked in wine, oil, and rose water on top, ensuring no abscesses come.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	On the third day, untie the linen and apply abundant cold water, then treat with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until healed.
dou reume des eulz	This is an extract from "Le Grand Chirurgie" by Guy de Chauliac
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	If some come with catarrh habitually, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weakened sight, and burnt papers;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and deep in the head there is a burning pain, and the patient sneezes.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Then know by these accidents that those matters and that catarrh come only from many veins, and the proper remedy for it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And have the patient lie on their back, then make a long incision down the middle of the forehead, and another across its width.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the left temple to the right temple, with the incision reaching down to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during chewing.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	And when the bone is uncovered, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then open the two lips of the wound and put in cotton wool and strips of linen.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then place compresses soaked in wine and oil on top, and guard against a hot abscess.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then dress it with drying agents that prevent inflammation of the flesh.
En teil maniere:	In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And apply this to wounds to prevent inflammation throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Chapter: "The Stopping of the Ears"
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	either grain, or beast, or a pebble or similar thing such as iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, such as peas, beans, peas
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing things like water and vinegar and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When something like a stone falls into the ear or in some other manner that does not fit with the ear and does not grow within it, then place the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, then apply a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then perform extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and when the sneezing begins, and block his nostrils as it comes on, and put around the ear compresses of cloth or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	And they hold the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Often fire comes from this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	If it does not come to a head, use small forceps for extraction; here is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it bursts open with the forceps, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	If not, then use small forceps with a doubled-over blade;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if it still doesn't come out, make a hole with a needle and insert the end of the hole into the ear opening with force, then plug what is around the hole with soft wax so that air cannot enter through the hole;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then draw fire strongly, for often it comes out as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it still does not come out in this way, then take some glue that birds use, and put some on an instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put some cotton around it;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw fire.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before the boil becomes hot and causes spasm;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the manner of cutting is such that first you make the patient lie down on his back, and draw out blood according to their strength, then have the patient sit between your hands, turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where it hangs.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	Make the cut like a crescent moon until you reach the stone, then extract it according to your strength and quickly suck it into your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And continue this treatment until they are healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is a grain that is inside and it becomes swollen, then administer extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it cannot come out, then administer the thin and subtle spatulum according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And help incise that boil.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear until you have made many attempts;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then extract with delicate forceps and tweezers, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, in the case of water entering the ear, the patient should first sneeze forcefully and plug the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on the same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it flows out by itself, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, then take many pins according to the length of your thin fingers, and heat them a little in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	And have the patient insert one or two of these pins into their ear piercing through to the other side, and then pierce another pin on top of the one in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	And continue doing this with one pin after another until all the water flows out, and thus it will all flow out;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you wish, take a reed, insert one end into the ear and hold the other end in fire until it chars;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then repeat this with other reeds until all the water flows out, as we have said earlier.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In extracting a small creature like a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the section on dividing;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	But if it [the dislocation] is of great size so that one can feel it, then bring forth an extraction with pincers.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	And this is the easiest thing to remove that exists within the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	When extracting worms that are inside the ears, if you treat them as we have described in the division and treatment of distillations, but the treatment does not help, then you must examine the ear in sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If no worms appear, then take them out with delicate pincers; if they do not appear, then use the tube that is depicted here:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert its most subtle end into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck strongly through the entire tube;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey coming out, then stuff cotton around the tube as I have described in the stone treatment;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they still do not come out as we have described, then bring forth distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms; you will find them in the treatment of distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And then distill your oil and medicines onto this instrument, as shown here:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And let it be of silver or fine brass underneath with small holes, and above for distillation;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press during distillation, have ready an instrument of well-made brass for this purpose; and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around its point neatly;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour your oil or juice into the funnel, along with whatever medicine you wish to use; and place the funnel in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then insert the razor with all its cotton into the ear, pressing your hand gently until the oil is distilled cleanly from it;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And when the patient feels it inside, the distillation should be placed in a heated vessel over the fire before being distilled into the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	But guard against it being too cold, for then the medicine would not be effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Chapter: "The Stopping of the Ears"
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without any holes in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And this same thing happens to people due to impacted wounds or a birthmark inside the ear, and these impacts sometimes penetrate deep into the ear so that one cannot see them.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	Sometimes it happens that there is no opening and none can be seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	Therefore, if one cannot see it because it has penetrated deep, it is difficult to treat in many cases. But if it can be seen, you must put the ear of the patient to the sun.
et regarde dedens:	And look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If you see the operation clearly, then perform all this procedure for which these are the forms:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be sharp and cutting both before and behind, so that it does not wound the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the operation is a birthmark or on the flesh of the ear, then hold it with fine forceps and cut it lightly until all that flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operations are deeply embedded in the ear, then take a light and fine razor and heat it slightly on the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the operation from which the patient feels pain in hearing, pierce it lightly, but be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then place in the ear a plug according to the width of the opening, and use Egyptian ointment for the dressing.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this several days until the wound is healed, or take a plug and use rosewater for moistening, and sprinkle powdered vitriol upon it.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swollen, then remove the plug and insert another plug moistened in wax made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is gone.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then continue treating it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	"And if there is discharge of blood, take a sponge and wring it out in cold water, then place it on the ear. Use other remedies that stop the discharge of blood, which are found in treatises on distillations."
de la char des papieres	"What is written on the paper"
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This substance that comes on papers from the eyes when they are moist and then dry, you should stretch it out using tweezers and pinchers, and scrape it off with a spathula from its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then place powdered vitriol on the wound.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it does not heal, then cauterize it with a subtle lenticular cautery, and after the incision, the cauterization should be moved.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	And many times they grow back, when some things remain at their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are burned with fire, those roots are singed and do not return.
de la gresle	"Hailstorm"
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Often come onto the eyes certain things that resemble hail in shape and hardness, and therefore this illness is called 'hail', being a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below;
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Be aware if hail moves from one side to another; this is an easy thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Then make the cut wide, then scrape each part lightly, then grasp it with tweezers and pluck.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot pluck it without piercing the paper a little, do not worry about the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the crack is large, sew it together and care for it until it is healed;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not put any pressure on it, because the eye will restore it quickly and leave flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the hailstone descends inside the ear towards the upper part, it turns the paper, and they take the hailstone with tweezers, pressing and holding it on both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if the paper is moved by the incision, it matters not.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	Once the hailstone has been cut out, rinse the wound with salt water and cleanse it with material that draws moisture until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	Here's a possible translation for "de la graisse des eulz":
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a fatty substance found in the tissues of paper that affects more often children than adults, causing great pain to their eyes. In the mornings they have catarrh and cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And because of this they constantly lie on their faces and sleep that way. Their papers are moist underneath their eyebrows, causing swelling and redness covered with the exinach that opens into the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press hard with your two hands and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of working is thus: the patient places their head on your hand;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	And then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that each part can contain, then place it on them;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two thumbs on either side so that the veins are gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture with the sharp scalpel a slit no wider than the wound made for bloodletting;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	And cut through the skin deeply until you reach the vein;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in several positions blood comes out from the slit, resembling a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	So draw it out all at once with a wad of cloth held between your fingers, and twist your hand back and forth until it is dispersed;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And make sure you do not insert anything into the slit lest you draw out the scalpel completely up to its eye without cutting.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the wound, then slightly pull apart the wound lightly until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract it as we have said, then wet cloths in hot water and cold water, place them on the wound, and press with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are some men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him until he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess forms, then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	hairs from the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs growing adjacent to each other in paper skin are wrapped around and become entwined, they harm the eyes and cause diseases such as habitual tears and softening of the eyelids and whitening of the eye; this can lead to blindness.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And there are four methods of treatment:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	Either by fire cautery together, or by hot medicine according to what is written in the cautery chapter, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by ligatures, depending on what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	First, place the patient's head in your lap, then turn back the eyelid with your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it has turned, then that's good
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	If not, stick an needle into all of its threads
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be near the edge of the paper where the hairs grow near these hairs; and draw the thread upwards over all the paper, and turn it towards the razor.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then cut into the part beneath the paper, underneath the hairs attached, from the large ring up to the small one
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then pull out the thread, and place underneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth; then press upon the paper with an iron shaped like a bellows, like a minting hammer, but always ensure that the shape corresponds to how much you want to elevate the cut surface
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if cutting off a large quantity of paper is needed according to its softness;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then cut along the entire spatula on both lines you have marked out, starting from the large ring down to the small one
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then place the cautery in one of the two angles of the heart, and then scrape it all.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then bring the two lips together with a stitch of thread made of fine wool, wipe away the blood, and make the excess hairs adhere to both eyebrows using any sticky substance you see fit.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if not, do not worry about it; then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then dress the wound without stitching with drying and constricting substances, for paper causes wounds to relive and prevents their healing; but stitches are harmful (as the ancients said), so perform these actions without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	And if there is another method:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 namely: you should mark the paper with a figure resembling the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have described, using three cauteries arranged according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	"Then cut that which is above the small forces equally according to the shape shown below:"
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you lack power to hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with thread attached, and insert it into the figure.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and place the other thread near the large pupil, and the second thread near the small one, and bring both threads together evenly between your two fingers.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift your hand evenly and lift all the skin where you have cut, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitching, and heal it until it is sound.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar softening ointments
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes the hairs of the paper are curled
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	then you must use what we have said about incising
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but stitching is more skillful in one way and another.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of cankers is according to this form
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and it is that you fold the paper and make an incision inside according to what I have said, then make two artificial cankers and two thin ligatures as long as the paper and the width of the spathule
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	And cut both heads of both parts where you hold the threads.
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	Then gently bring together both parts onto what lies above the oil paper, and strongly pull on the two canines of both parts.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	And let it remain thus for several days, and the hide that is pulled will die and shrink and rot until it falls off.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it takes too long, then cut it with force, then cure it so that it heals without any infection.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is healed, and if the paper has been removed, the hairs will no longer point.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is how you should shape the two canines according to this figure, and according to these measurements of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The procedure is as follows: take a fine needle and insert one thin, soft silk thread.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then bring together the heads and tie them both gently, and let the length of the threads be a palm's width.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then prepare another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the heads of the two threads together.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then have the patient place their head in your hand.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And let them be near the sun so that the work is well-lit, for this is subtle and delicate work. Then insert the needle all along the thread at the root of the hair and make it pierce through a piece of paper swiftly until you draw it up above the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull out the hair along with the thread, and insert that hair into the thread if there is one or two or three or more;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs come out along with the paper and the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the thread is pulled and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the thread from below along all the thread that you have prepared until the thread comes out of its hole and you can see it with your eye.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then you shall draw out the dart and thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hairs stand upright in their place and flesh grows over.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are short, then accompany them with one long hair from the eyebrows, and lift it up along with it, until it is lengthened and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	"Treatment of eye inflammation"
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called "aleacrati" or decay comes to the eye, there are two ways to treat it:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One is natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or cauterizing, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of treating it is to cut open that suture, spread open the lips of it, and place linen wicks inside, allowing them to remain until the wound is healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	It is not necessary to use things that dry out and constrict in its treatment.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	But there are things that soften it, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And rosewater or altered and linseed oil should be cooked, and diacylglycerol melted in some of the oils, and wrapped in a tent, for eye treatment.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And your remedy's treasure is that you take care it does not heal crookedly as before.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	These works we have spoken of are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness that is underneath, which is truly called "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wound and tear and cautery and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the way of the operation in it is that you take a needle with a doubled thread, stick it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid towards the right one until the threads come out on both sides of the flesh.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then stretch the flesh above the whole needle and cut it with a wide-spatula scalpel.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, then take the razor and place it in the crevice, turn the paper, and make two creases on either side within the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	And let the heads of the two creases be at the two corners of the incision that you have made, and form an angle such that when they are brought together, the figure is like the figure of the Greek letter "Γ".
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then remove that piece of skin according to the size of its sides and underneath from what is attached to the paper, then join the two separated parts together with a thread of wool.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then perform the treatment for that which we have said concerning softening medications and dressings, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or burn, then you must make a full-thickness incision below the hairs of the paper, as described above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then separate between the two leaves of a dressing, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one should perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares every device with all his power so that he can make the form return to its natural state;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the patient himself, according to what is necessary for work and tools in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this adhesion occurs in many people such that the paper above is stuck with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural tasks, then you must place the point of a razor underneath the paper and lift it upwards;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And stretch it like tweezers until you grasp what is adhering to the eyeball, which should not be too blunt nor too sharp so that the patient cannot bear if the spatula is too blunt or blinds the eye;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And your incision, with which you remove this adhesion, should be light so that the paper returns to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and all those gathered are healed; sometimes they apply salty water to the eye and rinse with fresh water and collyrium.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place a linen tent between the paper and the eye, and put on the eye wool soaked in egg white;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day apply collyrium and compresses until they are healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the angle of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	You should know that a nail has two forms:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	one is nerve-like and similar to hard fat, and another that is not nerve-like but resembles moist snow, which when touched with iron cannot be grasped with pincers.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both forms begin near the large pupil and gradually grow until they cover the entire sight, light, and motion of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of incision is as follows: the patient should put their head in your hand, then open their eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	Then lift the paper to your hand, then file the fingernail like tweezers of small thickness, and stretch it upwards.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	Then take a needle, and put on it a horsehair, or cowhair, or ox hair, then draw the thread tightly;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	And double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the fingernail, then push it all the way through, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, and scrape off all the hair on the side of the nail that touches the cuticle and the skin along the hair up to the tip, then trim the remaining part at the root of the nail bed with a sharp small scissors, leaving the natural flesh in the nail bed so that tears do not flow as usual through the incision;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And sometimes stretch the nail only with tweezers and thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then scrape it with a sharp blade all along here is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And ensure that the scalpel does not touch the delicate tissue and tear it, nor is the probe pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	After incision, apply a drop of ground sel to the wound, and cover it with a plaster made of lead, leaving it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	If the nail is not nerveless and you cannot insert the needle, nor can tweezers grasp it, many times this type of nail is cured by medicines;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And they grow as I have described in the division; if you wish to cover it, then open the patient's eye gently with a scalpel held thus:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	Raise the nail gently upwards; if you see that it does not thin and the reason presses against it, then distill from your mouth onto the eye a plaster made of lead and red plaster and ground sel, and stopper the eye until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then resume the other work according to this same operation until it is completely finished.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is any obstacle in the eye that prevents you from operating, such as a hot aposteme, then use milk first and cure the hot aposteme until it is healed; then recommence the operation as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with an onion, and cut off part of it, not all, so that no onion juice comes.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then drip into the eye red collyrium made from lead ore.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	And about the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Sometimes in the eyes of certain men red flesh is born, which covers the pupil and restrains upon the papers and turns towards the back, resembling a ruby.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the operation is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes wide, and you scrape off all that flesh with suitable lancets, and hold it with pressure.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then cut off the first piece of flesh, and keep cutting right down to the end without wounding the eye during the operation.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And let the incision of the pimple be like that which we have said in the cutting of the nail and small forces with which one removes thorns, as depicted after this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then apply to the eye some crushed willow bark or distilled red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and place on the eye hot cotton with egg yolk so that it is securely covered by the abscess.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	And if there remains any residue, and hot blood overflows, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with cooling remedies.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work until it is clean, and so do in all cases where flesh adheres to the eye due to this cause.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nonetheless, you should adjust the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural tendency;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and also considering accidental causes, specifically those involving iron.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	And do not attempt any of these procedures unless you see that the patient's limbs are able to withstand them.
des voines des eulz	And about the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Before veins appear red which cover the eye, they obscure sight and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is therefore necessary for you first to examine whether the eye with bone protruding from it is actually foreign, and if there is no other external disease besides the protruding bone;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Then heat it in such a way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Command the patient to put their head in your hand, then press those veins gently according to your wisdom, and let the onions be finely chopped as follows:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And hold two tweezers by degrees on one body according to this shape:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then heat it with force those veins gently, and squeeze out blood hour by hour afterward, until you see the veins swell up.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And be careful not to cut the eye with the tips of the tweezers, and perform this task at midday before the sun, and be very thorough in your work so that you only touch those veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, then distill green and red collyrium into the eye to dissolve what remains of the stone.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you are unable to remove all of it in that hour, then apply a plaster made of soothing substances for the pain of the eyes, and leave it on for several days until the pain is eased and a hot abscess is assured, then resume according to this method until they are healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And these are the forms of the remedies:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The physicians call a fistulous ulcer 'arissati':
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you treat it with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said earlier, but it is not yet healed, then there is a trick in it that you should incise above the abscess where it must burst, and remove all the moisture that is there until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove everything with the instrument mentioned here is its form;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And it is called 'sharp head', and let it be made of iron from the hammer's head, and be pointed like a file as it is in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it on the location of the corrupted bone, then twist it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption has been removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then apply drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the place is solid, and flesh is born there, and the bone of the bow is solid, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not renew itself nor becomes an abscess, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healthy;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, then there is no other option but to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and that you uncover the bone again with iron and hot medicines; and when it is uncovered, then take iron number one according to this form, and make the head of the iron three-angled, and thin the stake up to its top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the bone near the eyelid and keep your hand away from the eye, then turn the stake entirely until it pierces the bone; the patient will feel this through their nostril if they hold their hand over it.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	And then restore the place with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the joints, then the matter goes to the sinews.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	About the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes open wide in every direction and nothing obstructs the breath nor decreases it, then you must tie down the patient;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	Then wash it, then place cupping glasses or leeches without striking to suck, then put on the eye a linen cloth made of acacia and aloe and incense and nard, and then compress the eye, covering it with bandages and cloths;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And the manner of the bandages is that you take soft cloths and fold each one into four, then place them on top of each other according to how much the eye needs;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then compress it with a tight bandage from above and restart the cupping glasses to suck without striking.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the cupping glasses and keep the eye restrained day and night, and if the ligature becomes moistened, then you must draw it out carefully.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the ligature after the day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, that is good;
se ce non;	If not
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	then recommence the emplacement and dressings and the ligature and cupping glasses until it is sound.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	About the bursting of an ocular vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruption occurs in the ocular tissue, then appear, and come fire from the papers like grains of resin, and it is frightening to see
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you wish to cover it, the operation is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the part beneath until it reaches that above, then thrust another needle where there is the doubled thread of the eyelid
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the direction
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cover the place of the doubled thread and tie one part of the uve around it, and bind it tightly, then remove the needle and place a linen cloth moistened with egg white above the eye
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	And leave it until the threads fall out with the ulcer, then heal the eye with soothing substances until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And sometimes the wound is restrained on all sides by a circle of cloth until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye shows great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes from deep within the eye, and remove the moistened albuginea and let the eye descend and enter quickly.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	About the brow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease called 'alcunnati' is nothing but bowels assembled in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	And the manner of appearance for this operation is that you make the patient sit on an appropriate and straight seat, then take their head between your hands on both sides, and move it until you see the bowel rising up to your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then let it be inserted, and do not descend, nor let light enter, until the patient sees things as they were.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	And if it does not descend from below, know that it is acute; and if the descent of the bowel is not as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	Then seat the patient between your hands and take a fine spatula and cut through the corneal tissue about one point along the continuity of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown until the bowel emerges
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And once it has emerged, then distill hot water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and mixed with honey onto it; then cleanse it with another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Water of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have shown the likeness of acute cases in division, and what is needed for piercing
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	If done according to the instructions.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	The patient must be seated between your crossed hands, away from sunlight; keep the healthy eye tightly closed.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then place the paper on your left hand if the eye is left, or on your right hand if it is right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea on the thickness of a ray at the part where the lesser eyelid meets, then gently push the instrument called "almagda" until it pierces into the eyelid and you feel that "almagda" reaches the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And it is necessary that the measure of the path of "almagda" be equal to the depth of the space from the pupil to the end of the iris.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	And this is the cornea of the eye.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	Then you will see the bone through the transparency of the corneal tissue, and then move the instrument until it reaches where the water is present, and then press down along one pathway after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If water flows downwards now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting for a short time, if the water rises up through the second passage, place the funnel with the instrument; and once it is inserted and no longer rises, gently withdraw the sponge by turning your hand bit by bit.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back into water a little of precious stone dust, and lift it off from there the eye inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Next, place over the eye a plug of linen moistened in rose oil and egg yolk, and tie it with the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Nowadays, we put crushed cinnamon on top with plenty of egg yolks.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then carefully pierce only the connective tissue, not going too deep but making a subtle cut, then insert the sponge as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and upon completion of the procedure prepare for the patient a comfortable resting place where he can lie on his back in a dark and quiet location;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and let him be kept free from all movement, and have light foods, and not move his head either to the right or left; and let him be bound according to his condition for three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then release him in that same dark room, and test his sight; and if he can see some things, then let him remain bound for seven days.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And it is not necessary that you do this during the hour of cauterization or afterwards when incising; but rather, you should ease off on this, for water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If an abscess forms that has not burst by the seventh day, then you should open it before the eye and use a plaster that draws out inflammation.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	And when it is healed, then remove the bandage and put on its face a lint covered with olive oil to cover for several days, and keep it always in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then gradually leave the house little by little, and change into his clothes.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And know that no disciples should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us from Iraq who told us that in their land they make an ointment called "almagda," with which water can be sucked up, but nevertheless I have never seen any of it in our land nor do I know if it exists in the books of the ancients.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the likenesses of Almagest forms, so that those who do not know them may see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they should be made of pure gold:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	"And their heads of these same subtlety are two, and one behind has three angles."
de la char sor le neis	To remove flesh from the nostrils
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes joined wagons are born with various shapes, among which some resemble many-legged scorpions;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	And there are those where the enchanted flesh has a rusty color, and also soft flesh with good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	Therefore, in that wagon which is soft and not enchanted, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nostrils, and cast the unicorn upon those wagons, and draw them forth.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For cut off that which you can sustain on the subtle needle's sharp point until you know that all the flesh is removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything which cannot be cut off, then open it with all the subtle and light instruments, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	And if blood overflows, or a boil bursts, then burn it as necessary.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if it is malignant boils, then hurry and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned off, then apply neat asphalt and vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the nosebleed continues and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is healthy;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not reach as it should, know that there is flesh grown into the bone above, to which the instrument cannot cut:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Therefore you must insert a somewhat thick linen thread there, moistened with hot water, and have space between each knot of at least one finger or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	And the patient places the head of the thread in their nostril with some force and pulls it out smelling until it comes through the nostril into the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	And many times children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then grasp the head that comes through the knee with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them alternately as we do who are experienced in this.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the nerves have rotted that flesh, then pull out the threads, squeeze out the blood, and wet the thread in Egyptian oil, and replace it in the knee as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the oil has rotted all remaining flesh.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	Then place in the knee a bandage of lead for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the instrument used to purge the head, into which oils and medicines are distilled for the knee:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And let it be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp like a tube, with its channel as well.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	And if you see [that] make a closed cane, and let the instrument be full to purge the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And have many hands at the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	To remove flesh from the nostrils
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Often at the head, near the eyes, a disease called 'telul' arises, which grows and becomes large constantly, appearing visible to see.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And therefore you should cut it at the beginning, remove all hair, then put on the cautery or burning medicine in place.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	But if it is delayed to cut until it becomes large, take care whether it is hard, of dark color, and lacking sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	If you do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess; because when it is cut open, great harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	But if the abscess is soft to touch, not dark colored, and you see that it can be completely cut open, then drain the patient and cut without fear, and cure the area with drying and astringent things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nostril is cut and cauterized
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solutions of continuity occur in one of these cartilages, they profit little, whether in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary, when this happens to anyone, to consider whether the wound is fresh with all its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then join the two lips together in a stitch, and continue to heal it until it is clean
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are already separated on both sides, you must scrape away all the corrupted parts until they heal, then join the two lips together in a stitch, and bind them tightly, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood powder and crushed incense upon them
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put on top of the powders a strong plaster or another adhesive plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then heal it with an ointment until it is clean.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of stitching is as follows:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have described in the abdominal stitching;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	Of the swellings on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In many men, hard abscesses resembling peas in size, both small and large, occur within the lips
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Then it is necessary that you turn back the lips, and cut open each nostril, take hold with tweezers, and cut in every part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then fill the place after the incision of crushed glass until the blood is staunched.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then dress it with a poultice, and dress the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Often there appears on the flesh of the cheeks that which the ancients call "albulae";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	Then you must hold it with forceps and cut at its root, allowing the vein or blood to flow freely.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then place on the wound crushed glass or other powders that are restrictive and drying;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it again and cauterize it.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after cauterization
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	then these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	Of boils
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Somewhat, sharp and ugly scales are gathered at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-green, so much that corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth stink;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	therefore you should make the patient sit between your hands, their head in your lap, and remove the scales or tartar from the teeth until none remains;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and likewise do for blackness and greenness, yellowness and other stains, until they are cleaned;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if you remove what is there due to the first cause, it's good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not, then start again on the second day and the third, until all is removed;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that teeth require various shapes of tools to scrape them according to what the work shows, because the scrapers used to clean between the teeth have different shapes from those used to remove tartar from the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And let these forms and others be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when treating a toothache that you delay extraction as long as possible, for it should not be done at all;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to extract it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is constricted by a draught, you must be certain of the throbbing tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Often the pain leaves the patient and they believe it was in the good tooth that is extracted;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	yet still the pain does not leave due to this, for we have seen many times that the bad one remains.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are certain about the aching tooth, it is necessary to scrape around the tooth with a strong spathula to protect the gum on all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move it gently between your two fingers or with fine forceps until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the forceps;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And keep the patient's head steady between your knees while you hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth straightly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take any of these tools and place it gently on each side, and with the lever move it as you have done previously.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if a tooth is pierced and swallowed, you must fill it with bandages where the hole is.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and gently extract it with forceps so that it does not break while being extracted;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and much bleeding must be caused around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And make sure you do not break it, and if a piece remains, it will return to the patient through the wickedness of the root causing even greater pains than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act as foolishly as some hasty and reckless surgeons who sometimes break the jawbone and thus fail to achieve what we have described.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but sometimes cause serious illness through their carelessness due to roots left behind or a broken jawbone, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the tooth is pulled, rinse the area with wine, vinegar, and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	If bleeding occurs afterwards, which often happens, then apply powdered vitriol to the area;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the tools with which you first move the teeth should be long-pointed and thick-hafted so that they do not double over when you pull the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	And these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	"And let them be of heavy members so they do not bend at all during the pulling, and let them be of good iron well-made, and let them have teeth for holding moves."
de la racine des dens	"from the root of the teeth"
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains during extraction, you must place cotton soaked in honey on the spot for one or two days until the spot becomes softened; then insert the tweezers called 'algefri', from which the head seems like a bird's beak;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should also be made inside like a file, and that is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and place the instrument called "althali," that is, tweezers, this is the form.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break; and if the root comes out through it, that is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	But if not, then help yourself with all the tools, of which their forms come next:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument which has two handles, this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are placed on the surface of the teeth, and this instrument resembles large pliers, here is its form
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let this tool be strong so that it cannot break; and know that there are many tools for teeth;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other tools which are not counted here.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the wise master finds his own instrument, according to what his works and the illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity; and if one breaks a limb or other bones where it is useful, then he seeks the instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be thick and well-fastening to hold the bone, so that it does not slip away, but can hold and remove it;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And then restore to its place with appropriate medications, and if there is rot in the bone, even if it is small, remove all this equipment:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth appear not according to their natural course, and their form is ugly, especially in virgin women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is near behind the tooth, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be removed or filed:
adonques lou raie;	Therefore cut the ray;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	And if it is next to the tooth, take this instrument of which here is the shape, like a small beak, and let it be made of iron well-sharpened on top:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And gently tap with your hand every day for the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent so that one can file it, then use a file like this whose form is like
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the file with which needles are made;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	And file the tooth gently bit by bit over several days until it falls out without moving.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then level it at the end with any sharpener, and if the tooth is too sharp and wounds the tongue, then file down its sharpness until it is even so that it does not wound the tongue nor impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	When teeth lock
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When a tooth before the eye is knocked out, either by blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without it falling out, even after treating them with medicines that restrict it.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	then you must bind it with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold does not change.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	And let my son's thread not be too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you see the teeth aligned, then take the thread and pass it through both healthy teeth, placing the heads between the loose teeth, if there is one or more, until blood flows up to the neighboring healthy tooth.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then resume the wrapping up to where you began, and hold your hand gently but firmly, so that it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the heads of the thread with pliers, join them together, and pass them behind the healthy tooth, placing it so that it does not injure the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then leave it tied as tightly as possible until it can remain in place; and if it becomes loose or the thread rots, tighten it with another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it remains thus and serves in this manner throughout its lifetime, that is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two upper teeth and the two lower ones, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when a tooth falls out, replace it in its position little by little, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and let not the ignorant and impatient meddle with it; sometimes a tooth shape made of cow bone is used, placed in the position where there is a gap, secured as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the frenulum of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this tie comes under the tongue by nature at birth;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or through an accidental wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	And the operation is such that you open the patient's mouth and place their head on your knee, raising the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nerve ligature from behind, until the tongue is freed from its attachment; and if there is any hardness or knot, which is from a wound scar, insert the nail and cut it from behind;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	And ensure that the cut is not too deep, lest the artery beneath be harmed.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	Then lift the wound with rosewater and salt or cold water, then place a linen bandage beneath the tongue
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	And have the patient apply it every night so that the wound does not close.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if blood oozes from the wound, then place powdered vitriol on it
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the blood dries, cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this purpose
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat it with another cure until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	And if you see a streak of black or hard colour, which the patient does not feel, do not touch it, for it is cancer
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if it tends towards blenching and there is moisture present, then cast on the ointment called Onction, make an incision with a subtle spatula, and draw off the matter from both sides
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	If your blood becomes faint during your work, then place powdered vitriol upon it until it stops flowing, then return to your task until you have drawn all the fire.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then raise the lever of earth and stone, and heal with other remedies until he is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	Throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes into the throat come stones called 'godath', which are properly called tonsils, and when you treat them as we have said in our discussion, if they are not healed, then be aware:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If they are hard boils with a small opening and dark color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron, also for the letting out of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but leave it alone until it is ripe, and then you will break it off, or it would burst on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of pale color with a slender root, then prepare the instrument for cupping, but first make sure that the boil is warm and has softened.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit before the sun, and his limbs in your hand, and he opens his mouth and the servant takes it between his hands, and presses the tongue from below with all the instrument; this is the form.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And let it be of silver or refined brass like a sharp knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	When you press the tongue with all this instrument and see the abscess, then take the hot cautery iron and insert it into the almond, and pull it out upwards as much as you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	And bring some cloths with you, then wipe the instrument clean; this is the form that resembles forceps.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And moreover, their heads are curved and one towards the other, and they are very sharp, made of iron or tin.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then use pincers, of which here is the shape
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have incised one of the almonds, then incise the other in the same manner; afterwards, the patient should gargle with warm water and salt water, and if there is bleeding, he should gargle with warm water and pomegranate rind or myrtle leaves boiled, until the blood is staunched.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then [apply] the treatment until it is healed;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat besides the tonsils, so cut them thus like the tonsils equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and it had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not exhale because of the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if this had lasted for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was already so swollen that it had pushed out both ears through the nostrils
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I therefore acted quickly and inserted a probe into the one boil, then drew it out forcefully, and drew out a large portion of pus.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I inserted again into the other hole that had grown, and opened its mouth and pressed on its tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	afterwards, inserting the probe into these abscesses and cutting one part of it open, only a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the woman's throat passage was opened up, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease cutting this abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the boil crisscrossed often, filling again the space I had emptied, becoming very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Therefore I pierced and cauterized it inside its core:
ensi demora sens croistre;	So it remained without growing further;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I departed from these parts, not knowing what God did with him afterwards.
de l’uve	The eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When rheum descends to the eye, and it is swollen and protuberant, it is called 'perpendicular';
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is below, thick and round, it is called 'eye'.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the section on cutting, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the large boil has healed over but the inflammation persists, then you must lance it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	And the one that is rounded together and not protuberant;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and if it is red in color or blackish, you should avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient thereby.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is therefore necessary, when you see it in the manner I have described regarding its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit facing the sun and press his tongue with the instrument whose memory we made before;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it under, and cut with the two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two membranes.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you must not cut any further than the natural limit beyond which there is excess;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	For if you cut more, it harms both sight and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, apply what we have said in the incision of the two membranes, until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears being cut, you must use a device for cauterizing that fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of cautery is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is necessary that the patient place their head in your hand, and then press the tongue with the instrument mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and cauterize it with hot iron, so that it is not too thick nor too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And here is the shape of this instrument:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And at its head there is a hollow where one places the medicine, like the bowl of a spoon, and places the instrument with all the medicine on the eye;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	And let the patient lie on their side such that saliva and mucus from their mouth flow towards the medicine within, so it does not descend to the throat, and avoid drinking.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand over all of the medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour until you see it darken and the pain from the medicine has ceased.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	If you see this, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with the cotton at the corner of the eye until the cotton touches the eye.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry and it will fall off after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to restart the cautery with the medicine, do so, and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around it from the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be washed with cold water, and let it be cured by gargling until it is clean.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incising or using a cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and celery and similar herbs, gather them all or some of them into one pot, place it on the fire, and let it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	And the pot should be well covered with clay, and inside the pot there should be an instrument for removing hair like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be made of silver or bronze, and one end of the instrument should be placed in the patient's mouth until the steam rises to the eye through the canal until the eye is destroyed;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	Afterwards, repeat this often until the eye dries out; but be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot boil, as many things can happen then.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And do not make fire except for the declination of an abscess boil.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in its head an eggshell so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	For the eggshell does not allow the vapor to harm the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times something sharp like bone or fish spine, or anything else, gets stuck in the throat;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So then you pull out what you can see, and press down on the tongue with the instrument so that you can see the object move;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And what you cannot see and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	Perhaps then the object will come out through vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of nail, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	Then bind the sponge with thread, and then suture it.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	And when it comes to its place, it will harden, and then draw out fire;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come forth as we have said, then take the instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter into the throat, and have its head raised upwards;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and ensure you do not touch the epiglottis so that it does not close over everything, nor push the bone inside.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And have the patient move the instrument there so that they may know where the thing is hardened;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	So push it down until the place is drawn out evenly along the entire length of the instrument.
de la sansue de la gorge	de la sansue de la gorge
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Sometimes the sinew is healed as I have mentioned in the division, by the treatment with medications;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And when this does not help, then look into the patient's throat towards the sun, and then press their tongue with the instrument I have mentioned to you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vein, then treat it with a small iron pin or with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, then take a headed cane and put it into the throat of the patient, and then put red-hot iron on the head of the cane, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient sweats all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take a full handful of cold water, open the mouth, tilt it back without swallowing, and move it with your hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and as soon as the blood senses the water, it flows out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not flow out as we have said, then fumigate the patient with incense, using the same instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will fall without fail.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the manner of fumigation is this: take a pot with live coals in it, and cover the pot with a cloth pierced in the middle, and insert the head of the instrument into that hole.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then throw in your incense, and the patient puts the end of the tube in their mouth, closes their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but goes straight to the blood.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And now the blood will flow out, and if it does not, repeat the fumigation many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And the patient suffers thirst, and consumes salted and sour foods, and should not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Therefore, it will then be necessary for her to discharge it through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the tonsil looks like curved tongs for entering into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and resembles a goose's beak and has sharpness of a rasp, such that what it grasps, it cannot let go.
et vez ci la forme:	And here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	Chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many similar kinds of abscesses are described, according to what memory brings forth here from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	And there are two ways in which it resembles itself and those that hold moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for those places where abscesses are located on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	because the abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that occur in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	However, some abscesses should not be pierced until the bowels have completed their function.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And there are others that must be pierced as soon as they form and do not wait for completion, like those near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses occur near joints, and they are left until they have rotted around, sometimes the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	When an abscess is near the main member,
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	If they prick at their base, pierce them before they grow.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is not necessary that you pierce a boil that has grown without first digesting it, except for those near the base, so they do not go too deep and become an internal fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And it may take a long time to heal.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you should know the stage of the boil's perforation that has grown according to its completion, which is when the pain ceases and the fever subsides, along with the decrease in pain and redness, and the flattening and hardening of the head of the boil, and other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	And it is necessary that you make the incision where the boil depends the most and where it opens more easily;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And the incision should be long in proportion to the body, and if the boil is on the hands or feet, or in joints, near arteries, and in all similar places where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those cases where they affect, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better that you delay perforating until it is confirmed with digestion completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before then, the body will be filled with its venom, and is full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and perhaps harden the lips and deepen its wound.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And some abscesses should be pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you must bring small abscesses, small perforations;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many cracks according to the likeness of the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to dig with the cautery and cover
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when they have become like the scales of a dragon, and are softened, then you must do as one does for boils.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such ones that are split into three corners, and those whose covering is like the skin of a mullet, as abscesses of angels
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such ones where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those that have no head, like soft superficial abscesses, you must pierce them plainly
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when an abscess is large, and it has collected much bowels, and you pierce it, then do not draw out all the bowels at that hour, but draw out a part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again afterwards;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this many times gradually, until all the bowels come out;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Similarly if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying a child, or small infants, or elderly feeble men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit sometimes jumps at the release of the bowstring, which by chance causes the death of the patient, and you do not realize it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore leave this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then examine the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it is a clean cut, then bring clean linen or old cotton bandages;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it is a large abscess and there are many holes in it, then you must put into each one a bandage so that they come together.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have cut off a part of the skin around an abscess, and you have shaved it around, then you must fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove the dressing, and apply ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if flows of blood occur during your procedure, then bring cold water and towels, wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the bleeding persists, then apply dressings and treatment, and the powders that I mentioned elsewhere in this book; and if it is during wintertime, and the location of the wound or abscess is very nervous, then you should place wet bandages and cloths on it, warmed in wine and oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it is in summertime, and the location is fleshy, then you must place wet bandages in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove the abscess, cleanse it, and dress it as necessary until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this, he must universally recognize in treating abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is that chapter.
des soros	Here are some translations of the word "soros" from Middle French to English:
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the head meets the neck come small abscesses, resembling those of chickens in their skin, and there are many similar ones.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some thick ones and such where there is moisture like poultices;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and there are those that are hard and bony in appearance, and there is no doubt if the artery opposes them.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting is such that you should test all instruments called 'entromissoire', from which the form comes later, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	But if it contains moisture, then close it with a long stitch.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, scrape it off without leaving any of the skin that contains it, because it returns again if anything is left.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then dip cotton in Egyptian unguent, if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not that, use water and salt, and dress the wound until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And these are what remain of the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then start again with cotton as before on the second day and the third, until you know that there is nothing remaining from the night;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the wound with appropriate ointment until it is clean.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if an abscess holds much matter inside, cut it according to this shape, with a long incision
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and cast your incisions, and scrape off all the skin around it, and focus all your effort on drawing out what lies beneath the skin
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery opposes you, do as I have told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And likewise do for an abscess if it is hard, and with cutting and dressing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cutting of a hard and moist abscess is easier, because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And also for those abscesses that have no moisture at their head, and especially for those hard ones that I cut from the head of an old woman
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	I found the abscess to be like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if one had tried to break it, they would have done as much harm as striking a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	For other abscesses that come at the head, especially those that appear on the heads of children and the roots of ears, open them always in the lowest position possible, so that the boil can easily come out
et les cure si com il covient.	And heal as it is necessary.
des scrophules	scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin; sometimes they also come elsewhere on the body, and there are many of them, and they intertwine with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	Each boil is properly within its own skin, such as the pimple on the forehead and the abscess on the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And similar sorts of boils are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others malignant that refuse to yield to healing.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	Therefore, the one that you see has a good constitution to touch, and is similar in color to the body, moves from every side and is not hard against the veins of the neck nor against the artery or the passage, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	So you should cut it from above, scrape each part, and stretch the two lips of the heart wound apart if necessary, as we have said regarding head abscesses;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And cut little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor should the scalpel be too sharp or cutting deeply, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, then place powdered vitriol or some powders that stop bleeding in the wound, and press the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound becomes softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the bleeding has stopped, return to your work until you complete it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then check your finger for any small scabs, and cut them off and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, it is not necessary to cut off that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it fall without harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then fill the wound with Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton, then dress it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the entire scab, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up tightly; for there will be no excess left due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you must understand to cover the root of it, and draw fire, and the cut as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scabs that are full of fluid, pierce where they burst open;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And pierce it as that mentioned earlier, depending, then bring bandages with salve and similar things so that it rots what remains of the rot.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well cleaned, apply a salve to the flesh until it is healed.
de squinance	de squinance
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	But I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with coughing fits, it is necessary that the fold of the throat called 'epiglottis' be cut away;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and do not provide assistance to those who have hot abscesses in the mouth or throat, as all their veins and pores are open.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the vessels, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid suffocation which comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we do so below three circles or four a small cut across, between two circles or through the quantity of the cut of the soft palate, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And these places are so attached to the epiglottis that there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long on either side.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, he must stretch the skin of the neck all around, then cut open the chest until he reaches the breastbone;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then sever the esophagus as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the cutting of the windpipe at the breastbone that blood flows from the broken place and by the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And once the danger of strangulation has passed, join together the two lips of the wound in the chest and sew it up without the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medications that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked off, and the patient is judged to be near death, and his breathing has failed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, cut off the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow and breathe through the wound, thus avoiding death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And therefore the ancients commanded that the wound be kept open until the worst of the illness has passed; this usually takes three or four days. Then they commanded that the wound be stitched and dressed until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to heal her, but found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that the blood issuing from it was not from the veins or arteries but only from the throat, and the breath was coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastily cleaned and dressed the wound until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And after some days, her voice returned to normal, and she recovered her usual appearance;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore I say that there is no fear in cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This type of abscess is called 'hernia of the throat' and appears as a large, dark bruise, common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	And it occurs in two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	by nature and by accident.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Nature has no remedy.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And accidents occur in two ways: one is like a bruise, the other is like an abscess that comes from an artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear involved, but one should not operate with fire cautery except in the case of a small [abscess], and prove and search this throughout the entire introvertor:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it like a hard tumor and not connected to any vein, cut it like a boil and treat it entirely with its cover if there is one;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well all around, and cure it as necessary until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of fatty tumors
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many kinds of tumors, which I will describe in detail;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now I must explain the difference between a tumor and an ulcer.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that an ulcer is warm and has fever until the boil bursts, and then decay is complete;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	Without heat or fever or pain, and contains the lymph, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a sieve, and becomes swollen;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they are similar to either fat or moisture, and most have the colors as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	"When treating a fatty tumor, it is necessary to first examine and express the contents using an instrument called the 'intromittor', according to the shape described in the following chapter."
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of examining the abscesses in the nose is that you take the moistest part that you find in the abscess and twist your thumbs little by little until you know that the instrument has pierced the center, then according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then remove the trocar, and beware lest anything spurt forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moist pus runs forth, whatever its color may be, open it as I have said of other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after the trocar no moisture comes forth, know that it is fat; therefore cut it in crosswise and take it with forceps, and scrape it lightly from each side and beware of the skin where it lies so that you draw it out whole with the lymph;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	But if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if a little remains and the blood grieves you, then apply to the wound some corrosive waters, bind the wound, and put on cooling remedies for the heat of the wound, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the pain is great, cut open both lips of the wound, and treat those that enter the flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if a beating vein is opposed to you or another, quickly apply powdered vitriol to the place and leave it for two or three days until the wound rots, and let the blood's ebullition rest.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to cauterize what remains of the pain.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Here are the shapes of intrusive instruments, and they come in three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	Big, medium, and small
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	And there are 3 squares called 'albaret', and 1 called 'breb', and they come in three varieties
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small to surround fistulas
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles used to suture wounds, and they are made of brass, iron, or silver; those that are yellow are most valued, and they are especially praised for surrounding fistulas
et sont de III manieres:	and they come in three varieties
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small according to the size of the hole's width
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the needles are very similar, as you can see here
grans, moiens, et petis;	Large, medium, and small
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and there are also needles with two curves in three varieties
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and there are needles with three curves, which also come in three varieties
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and there are needles with two curves and needles with one curve only, both of which come in three varieties
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The tips of these instruments are cutting; there are some that cut only on one side, from which the nerves are stripped off so as not to cut the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	Among these instruments are also spoons inserted into handles, so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three kinds of them:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium-sized, as you can see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	Use them only on smooth skin, such as legs, arms, breasts, angles, and similar areas;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	Sometimes another small instrument is used, resembling the skin of fists, in this shape, with which blood is wiped away:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	"And it is sometimes placed at the location where veins and arteries are severed or where there has been excessive bleeding. Sometimes they are made in this larger size:"
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes men's breasts swell when they begin to be corrupted until they resemble women's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	And who wants to treat them should do so according to this form from line .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strip away the fat, dress the wound with salve containing flesh powdered fine, then bring together the two lips of the wound for stitching, and treat it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if the breast tilts downward and is large like in women, cut it into two along the two similar creases above.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	So that one holds onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape:.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders as necessary until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision is not complete because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let him suck until he consumes the remainder and the fat, then heal it until it is clean.
des apostemes des asselles	"Abscesses of the armpits"
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	"The abscesses that occur under the arms are usually hard tumors resembling scrofula or have rough surfaces, and some contain moisture."
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the boil has been drained out, then fill the wound with soft cotton, and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and dress it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the boil resembles scrofula, then cut it as we have said for scrofula wounds, and if the wound fills with pus again, then apply a cauterization as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When an artery is cut, and the skin above it is cauterized, abscesses often form; likewise when a vein is inflamed and becomes abscessed.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	If one recognizes this, then if it is for the artery, the abscess will be long and deep;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	And when you feel it with your fingers, there will be extraction.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	When it is due to the vein, red appears around the opening.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and angles of the jaw and neck, and in many other places; and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to avoid the cautery of iron, and especially for one who is at its head; also for one that is swollen from an artery cut through the skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then open the incision widely, carefully separating the artery from the tissues until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then place a needle beneath one side and pierce it through to the other side, and tie off the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have shown you regarding the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then prick the spot between the two ligaments with an intrument until blood comes out of it; and let the abscess be drained.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply pressure to the outer thigh until the ligament drops.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is due to the cutting of a vein, then you must squeeze whatever you can from the abscess towards all the skin, then place the needle beneath the spot where you are holding it and pierce it through; and let there be one doubled thread so that you may draw it out from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie off the abscess as I have told you, with the ligament of one of two parts using a thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the thread is not on fire, then insert another needle underneath all the thread beneath the incision of the first needle, and pinch the threads at four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut the excess from the heart and leave what is tied.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a cloth moistened in wine and oil upon it, then apply dressings and ointments until he is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of boils on the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, just as boils come to the artery and vein, so too do boils appear on the nerves when they are injured or from excessive exertion, etc.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens most often at shoulders and hips, and in all places where there are joints; these are the worst abscesses, their color resembles the color of flesh, and they are found in many conditions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is squeezed strongly, the patient feels pain, but it is not deep within the body, rather beneath the heart;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And moves easily in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor below nor above; and one that is in joints should not be cut with a knife:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	By chance, there might be contraction here.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And those who are at the head or forehead, cut the skin at the temple.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, grasp it with forceps and cut into its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, suspend it with tweezers and scrape it off, then cut into the skin and bring together the wound edges in stitches; treat until healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of hanging warts
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else; this is an illness called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, having fine roots and large heads.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	There are some that are small and others very large.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw one man who had two in his belly that resembled mushrooms more than anything else; they were white with fine roots and split open, continually secreting moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them open and found that one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six; when incised, this is how you can tell if the patient is moist: the flesh appears pale, moist, and with fine roots.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If he strikes the shoulder blade wide, and the fire cautery is present before you.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For at cutting comes many times too great flows of blood; if your blood fails, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of lead, and tie the artery as we have said, leaving it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	Then bind it tightly, and do not cease to pull on the lead thread until it cuts through the artery without labor or struggle.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are large, then fear cutting itself for the belly, but you can nevertheless cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and make sure not to cut the lobe which is of fox color and poor sense and produces milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	"For this is an incurable tumor, and I will discuss the treatment for cancer later on."
quant li boude ist fuer	"When the wound has healed"
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the swelling of the belly comes from a cauterization of wound or cut of syphilis, and is on the belly and in some cases involves the testicles, as it happens in other diseases, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what is ahead, or from flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is due to rupture of the sinew and exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light matter without pain, and has varied exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the bursting of the intestine, then it becomes more diverse; and when it is pressed with two fingers it sinks in and then returns, and sometimes it is hard, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the anus during difficult labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining [it].
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is due to blood, then the abscess opens by these signs: large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to windiness, then it is soft to the touch, and the appearance shows whether it is for arterial blood, or venous blood, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary for you to leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Because there is doubt and fear about it, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestines or the bowel, then you must instruct the patient to tie their shirt and stretch out entirely straight, then press around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then have them lie quietly between your hands, then go around the place you marked with the spatula, then stretch half of the abscess upwards with the whole large thumb.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie around it with a strong thread or silk cord tightly, and let the knot be secure.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then open half of the boil extended over the bandage, and insert your index finger, seeking the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught in the ligature, untie it, and place the intestines back inside the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the boil, take it with the pincers and cut off any excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein opposes you, go gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, thread them with silk threads, and pierce them crosswise where you have made the incision.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then press the abscess in four places around the needles, and if it bursts, remove the needles, leave the wound to drain, and cut away any dead flesh.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you can also cut it when it becomes thin and ready to burst, then treat it as necessary, and cauterize the boil as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	Extract the blood or moisture you find, then treat the place where it is necessary, and bind the joint.
dou chancre	Of a chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the previous section about the appearances of cancer, and how one should operate there with medicines, and how to avoid iron treatment.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And we speak of cancer spreading to the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancers are located where they can be removed like cancers that are on breasts or in the hip area, they should all be cut out at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when it is large and old, do not approach it for I have never seen anyone healed from it.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	Neither has anyone else ever been healed from it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And when the operation is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, you should purge the patient of black bile once.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make him fast if he has shown signs ofpletion, then place him in a good position to perform the operation;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	Then pluck your eyelashes near the cancer, and the hair from all around it, and scrape off all the bone without leaving any behind.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And let the blood flow freely, and press well on the wound with your hand or something else; if the bleeding opposes the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding stops.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply other remedies until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have previously discussed in the chapter on dropsy the similarities between it and how water is gathered together, as well as the signs of each similarity and the treatment using medicines or surgery.
si est eclites soulement;	If it has only begun to swell
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	And one should not use iron in these two conditions:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	That is to say, tympanites and hydrosalpinx, for they are deadly.
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore, when treating this form of dropsy called "eclites" with medications and the treatment does not help, consider if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsy, such as coughing, diarrhea, and similar conditions.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	If you don't touch with iron, there is doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if the patient is of strong virtue and has no other illness than dropsy alone and is not too young nor too old, you should act thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Lift the patient upright onto your hands, and the assistant press the belly by pushing water towards the lowest part of the back, then take the spatula (backward facing) according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	With a point, and yet not so deep that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor can it cut.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then look if dropsy has entered towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	If so, you must make a cut with the scalpel III fingers wide directly below the navel.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if dropsy is due to liver disease, then make your cut on the left side of the navel III fingers wide.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	And if it's due to worms, then cut on the right side, and ensure that the patient does not lie upon the incision so that the excesses do not flow towards that weak area.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce all the hide with the instrument, remove it and raise your hand to all the space between the skin and the sinew as when skinning, to the quantity of one fingernail or around.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the sinew until the space comes to the empty place, and that is the location of water, then draw it out and put this instrument in its form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a thin silver rod, made of brass or lightweight iron, with a small hole at the bottom end.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side, three holes;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other side, and one more
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And the head is cut like a feather, which is the shape of the incision with which scribes cut feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the top of the blade is the handle, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it stops now on the instrument.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Then empty out one half or one third of it, for if you empty too much at this time by chance the patient may die from the release of his spirit due to shock, or fall unconscious, or approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	But emptied according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulse.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then draw the instrument and hold the water, which is now retained by the heart that obstructs the opening above the spleen, as I have spoken of, that you pierce in this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then begin the instrument again on another day, if you see the patient enduring this, and draw out a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this for some days, but guard against letting too much remain at once; just a drop of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water in him, then he will be cured by hot earth or sand, frequent sweating baths, or exposure to the sun, and he should drink.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And the cure of drying medicines until they are healthy, and cauterize upon the stomach, liver, and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	The section on impotence is titled "De l'estopement de la verge" which means "On the stoppage of the penis". This refers to erectile dysfunction or impotence. The text discusses the causes and treatments for this condition.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or one that is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it must be pierced promptly with a very fine needle according to this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then place over the hole this subtle plug of pitch, and tie it, holding it thus for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, remove the plug, let him pass urine, then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And perhaps no plug is needed at all, for the urine that comes forth will leave it open.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose hole is small shall use lead plaster, as we have said, so it may widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those whose hole is not in its proper place are handicapped; for some are born with the hole at the tip of the penis, which means they cannot urinate without lifting their penis upwards.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the mouth of the urethra, and this is a serious condition.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	The method of treatment is as follows: the patient should lie on his back, then stretch the head of the penis and cut it like the quill of a feather, so that the hole falls in the middle, as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware of excessive bleeding that often occurs; if it happens, staunch the flow with whatever can stop blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	Of the blisters of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times these swellings come to the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and among them are malignant ones and benign ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	therefore you should take hold of them with a sharp pin, scrape and clean all, then place damp cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on top;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the diaphoretic ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the navel is inflamed, of foul color and smelling bad, you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have scraped it off, and if the swelling is at the tip of the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then first remove the swelling that is inside;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is loosened, then treat the outer part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For if you treat them together, then the head of the penis may not be spared from being pierced, and blackness and corruption come to its tip and around it.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply the plaster made of honey and flour mixed with pomegranate peel and figs, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauteries help with two conditions combined:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	That is to say, for bloodletting, and for rotting flesh;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you should insert a lead tube into the penis and have the patient urinate through it;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the skin around the head of the penis is hard and tight, which happens to those who are not circumcised or have a wound or abscess there, then you should burn it with the cautery comb until the foreskin is loosened, and relieve the pressure from the head of the penis in all directions;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	And if it is difficult to retract the foreskin, then you should burn it with the cautery spoon slightly at the head of the penis and the skin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then carefully draw them apart, and insert a thin linen cloth dampened with cold water between them so that it does not become hard again.
de la circoncision	Et se c’est un garcon qui doit estre circoncis, si covient que tu coupes le pelz a .vi. mois, et les autres enfans a .xii. mois; et il est bon quant tu les feras circonsire quant l’enfant aura .iii. ans ou environ.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision does not involve continuity like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	However, when we perform this procedure by choice, especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best and easiest work for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children because it was not part of their law, and we only have knowledge of it through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen most masters and surgeons who perform circumcisions around the glans, and through force, and with one stroke;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	but the heart may fail because there are two veins, and sometimes one above is cut off while the other below remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or if it is covered up again, there will be double pain, and during cleaning, the tip of the member may not be secure;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and during cleaning of the foreskin, sometimes the iron may slip and ruin the work, and many times they do not need cleaning afterward, as I have seen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Regarding the cleansing done by force, I have found that using a thread tied around the entire length is the best experiment because the force cuts equally well both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, cut all around in one swift motion;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	But let the threads be well wrapped around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	And the manner of the first operation should be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only binding the thread around the penis at first, and then you let him rest in all ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then hold him straight between your hands, and hide the weights behind your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then place your hand on the penis and blow on the heart, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis is inside;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then clean it well from the impurities that are gathered there, then tie the foreskin with a double thread, then tie it below at another point;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it there with the second tying between the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two threads, then quickly raise the heart upwards and pull the head of the penis;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	Then let blood flow little by little, for this is the treatment;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And sprinkle powder on it and on the powder lay a bandage made of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, mixed with good fresh rose oil, and let it stay overnight, and treat again until healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form for the preparation of forceps is this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	Let the two heads be thin and sharp, and let the heads also be as large as a hazelnut, equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The fault of the cautery is when the heart is cut during the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, you should stretch it to your fingernail before the wound becomes inflamed;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, use forceps, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if three days pass, and what is under the penis is swollen, let it be until the inflammation subsides somewhat, and then peel it gently.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If you move the cup as you are able, and guard from the part of the shaft, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore heal the wound caused by powder with the methods we have said for treating powders; if one scoops out too much from the heart and it goes upwards, there will be no harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore heal it as we have said until it is healthy again.
dou retenement de l’urine	"On the retention of urine"
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Retention of urine is due to obstruction from stone, or blood clots, or bowel, or flesh born, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if urine is not released, and you see that retention is due to a stone located in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be made to bend over on his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And place their feet on their back, extend their belly towards the part above the back, and let the patient hold themselves down as much as they can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And then the neck of the bladder is constricted during the expression of the stone above, causing urine to be retained.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come forth as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	And let it be made of fine, lightweight silver, like a bird's feather;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And let the tube be one and a half palms long, and slender at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a doubled thread, and tie at its head a pouch of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And cut off the excess wool and insert it up to the head of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter made from egg yolks, and have the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and penis with moistened oil of olive and hot water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then gently place the syringe in the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the belly.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it emptying, but this should not be done in that manner unless the tube through which it goes is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then slowly pull out the thread along with all the lint, and let the urine follow the lint; then remove it completely, and let the urine flow freely.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	"On the diseases of the bladder"
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	"When there is erosion or blood in the bladder, or putrefaction has accumulated there, and you see that watery and medicinal substances are being discharged, then use all the instruments called a 'clepsydra', of which this is the form:"
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It has three holes:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And the raised parts are such that the medicine's cutting should be so tight that it effectively stops the penis without any additional help, so that moisture can be drawn out and inserted when needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see your medications entering the bladder, place the head of the funnel in the moisture, and draw out what is inside it.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	You shall draw out moisture from the cauldron, then strongly push back the lid.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	Then moisture will enter inside, and it will come to the bladder at once, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And this is the form of the subtle enema used to administer an enema to the bladder:
si est ci:	Here is
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or brass, and its head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	And below it is placed against the back where the sinews fall.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and put into it the moisture that you wish to use for the enema, then tie it between the two breasts with a doubled good thread, and heat one part of this moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then insert the tip of the enema into the urethra, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has flowed in, until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, and pierce it evenly around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then insert a strong thread into these holes, then close the circle as one closes a nut, and put within it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it on the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as you did with the bladder, squeezing by hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	"on stones"
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already said in the section on stones their types and extraction together with remedies;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And I have said the difference between a stone entered in the kidneys, and all its signs, and in which stone one should operate by cutting;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	And in the bladder, and in the penis.
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is entered in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that water jumps from the bladder like water in its fineness.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	And it openly appears like sand, and the patient feels grit in his penis, and he often sneezes, and then becomes rigid.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	And many die from these wounds.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	And the healing of children is easy until they are four years old; and it is very difficult in old people; and it is moderate for those between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And treatment is easier for those with a large stone than those with a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	When we come to treat, first cleanse the patient with an enema to draw out all the feces in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes hinders finding the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet and lift them up and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it jumps out from above.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then have him sit between your hands, prepared like this, with his hands under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then find it and touch it inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the space, then quickly cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall out on touching it completely, then moisten your left index finger with oil if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is fully grown.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	And place it at its base, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your two fingers, then move it to the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press upon it with your two fingers, and push it out where you see the incision.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend his right hand's genitals upwards, and remove the skin that is beneath the genitals at the part where the incision is made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then insert the spatula in place, of which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And cut between what lies between the genitals and the fundament, not midway but at the left side of the buttock.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And let it be straight upon the stone, and your two fingers always on the fundament, and make the cut across so that it is wide from without, and within narrow, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	Perhaps then press with the finger that is on the fundament, causing it to jump out without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	And know there are such stones that have corners and edges:
si est griés a issir;	If it is painful to pass:
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and some are smooth, like a pebble, and rounded, from which the outcome is favorable.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Therefore, for those that have corners and edges, make the incision larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump out, then you must use forceps that are shaped like a file at the tip to extract the stone so that it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or place underneath the instrument a fine, curved tool at its end;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot grasp it this way, then widen the hole slightly, and if blood seeps out, sprinkle powdered vitriol on it;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are more than one stone, first insert the largest one into the neck of the bladder, then cut it, then pull it out with forceps, and then remove the smaller ones if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it must be opened wider and a larger incision made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	If death occurs, or if urine comes repeatedly through where the wound cannot heal.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	But nevertheless, make every effort to pull out with forceps, or cut it out with pincers, bit by bit;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And once you have completed your work, cover the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bind it tightly, and place over it a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the hot inflammation.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then have the patient rest on his neck, and do not untie the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove the bandage, wash the wound area very well with oil and water, then apply ointment of diacereion and ointment of basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if hot inflammation and corruption come to the wound, and congealed blood appears in the bladder, and urine is retained in such a way that it cannot pass without pain with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Then cut your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will damage the bladder and cause putrefaction.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound of water and air and dust, and help him in all ways that you know until he is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that every time you treat him, you tie his two thighs together and gather the medications on the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, stuck within it, and urine cannot come out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	then the treatment I mentioned earlier, which involves cutting him many times, is excused by this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already tried this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron needle according to this shape and with three points stuck into a splinter of wood
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	Then gently insert the probe into the penis until it reaches the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	And turn the probe in your hand against the stone little by little until you can pierce the stone on the other side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then urine will come soon after, and then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is still inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Soon afterwards broken, and sparks fly with urine, and the patient is healed.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this due to any obstacle, then tie one thread under the stone and another above it; then insert the probe towards the stone between the two threads; then draw out the fire, untie the thread, and cleanse the blood that has gathered in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat him until he is healed
de la piere des femmes	de la piere des femmes
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It can happen that a stone gets stuck in women, and if it does happen sometimes, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	And the second is that it is difficult to find a skilled woman who dares to uncover herself for physicians, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of hands
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth manner is that women's stones are more deeply embedded than men's, so one must make a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if you must resort to this, then you should take a skilled midwife, but if you cannot find one, then seek out any discreet physician.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And she presents a well-reasoned case for the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she perform what you command regarding the inspection of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and examine very carefully whether the woman is virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then she should put her thumb on the fundament and seek for the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, she should press it under her thumb, and advises that she put her thumb into the patient's anus, squeezing and pressing her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the anus, where it moves around and feels the stone in that area;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move her thumb above or below the stone, and let the first cut be small.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	Then place the hot iron on the hip, if you feel the stone so close the wound until the stone can exit fiery, and know that there are many kinds of stones.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	This is to say, small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those with roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	and know their similarities for knowing the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the blood overcomes you, then place crushed vitriol in its stead, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stanched;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the tools I told you about ready for extracting the stone from men to help you in your task;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if the blood overcomes you, and it is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the wound and bind it with bandages and cloths, and do not recommence cutting, and leave the stone alone and do not attempt to remove it, lest the patient should die.
puis cure la plaie.	Then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has been stopped, and the place is ready, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	Here is the translation of the given text with a focus on the term "hernie carnosous":
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	The gathering of water is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white phlegm that is underneath the heart of cows and contains the egg.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And it is called 'spleen', but sometimes it is properly within the tissue of the egg, so if one thinks this is the other egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And it is the skin of the cow between the white spleen that we have spoken of
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	But none are like a drop of milk.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia comes from weakness that affects the thighs, and this matter becomes spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	Sometimes this moisture comes from percussion on cows and has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	Either it is colored declining towards yellow, or red without blood, or black, or watery white; and there are more
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this gathering: if it is in the white spleen we have spoken of, then the abscess is round and long like the shape of an egg, and does not open the cow's skin because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess will be soft with part of the egg, and therefore one thinks it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the scrotum, he feels it well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, try the whole four-square introvert, which is shown above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	"Therefore, according to what comes after the introite, judge what is inside."
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cauterize it with iron, the patient must be made as healthy as possible according to our ability and the fullness of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then lay him on his back on something a little high, and put many blankets underneath him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to sit on the right side, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the testicles;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the scalpel and cut the skin of the testicles midway along its length near the pubic hair, making a straight incision through the skin of the testicles up to the white scrotum, and scrape it finely according to your ability;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the sac full of water with a wide opening, and draw out all the water, then place your bandages, and let the sac be upstream.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the heart of the kidneys, but only the sac itself;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Cut it all or in pieces itself subtly, the cost of him so that if you do not cut it well enough, water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the egg jumps out during your operation, then put it back in its place once you have finished the sac's work.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then sew together the two leaves of the heart of the kidneys with a stitch, then heal it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then tie the vessels that are suspended, while doubting the flow of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the kidney with all its suspensions, and remove the egg, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if water is gathered into two parts together, know what these are";
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	Then cut the other part evenly as you did the first, then squeeze out the blood, and put on the wound clean linen moistened in rose oil";
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And put over another layer linen moistened in wine and oil, and place it on the two wounds, then put doubled cloths over them, and tie everything according to this pattern.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and fill them with woolen lint according to this likeness and sew them together at the waistband of the breeches, and one of the heads takes up the fundament as far as the back, and the other at the part of the wrist.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	And the other two heads over the two angles, and let all the restraint be assembled in the loop of the breeches.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And sometimes this root is medicated with cautery instead of iron cutting, and it is that you take one sharp scalpel cautery, and cut the skin of the wounds, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white matter that contains water is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take the cautery according to this form, and prick it once on the sinew, and burn the skin with this fine hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And scrape it in all ways that you can, until you scrape everything away.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and make sure the fire does not touch the eye
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	And know that this procedure is more beneficial;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And move carefully avoiding bloodletting, and gently cut as much as needed.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	If anything opposes you, such as a hot abscess or bloodletting or other issue, then treat what opposes you according to what is written above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is afraid and will not undergo this procedure because of its horror, then prepare for perforation, as I tell you. But when you are certain through signs that we have said indicate that there is moisture there, then make the patient sit on a raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then prick the abscess at its lower part with the entire spatula width, and insert the cautery into the wound.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Let the opening be wide enough so that all the water flows out freely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the wound, tie it, and let it remain for the rest of the water to flow out; then treat it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the linen bandage does not allow water to exit through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat hydrops with, whose shape is shown earlier.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	Then widen the wound's opening and ensure that water flows out; know that six months or so after it has gathered again as before, it will then pass its days.
de l’aposteme des coions	"On boil on buttocks"
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that there is fear and many dispositions in the cutting of this vein, therefore it seems better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you about the operation and the like of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say therefore that many abscesses come into the body, especially in the groin area.
et c’est par mout de cas.	And that happens often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known to happen due to acidity or fever that spreads through the joints or from blows;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And the color of the boil appears according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and feels no pain, yet it is a severe boil;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes there appears a painful, hard, and pockmarked boil with a reddish hue, or from the bursting of an artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the boil when pressed with two fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And one should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is caused by the swelling of a vein is known by its disposition when touched with two fingers, and it can be well incised in this manner and others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And you should cut the skin around the joint, then pull the egg upwards and remove the fatty membrane that surrounds it.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already solid with these roots, then you must draw out the egg, along with its head.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is air in the syphilis or in those that are within the vessels, then you must remove all of this thick substance, and round off the head.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	"And if the birthmark of the skin is in the hinder part, then it is necessary that you cut off all of it and remove the boil as we have said."
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when your procedure is completed, then fill the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then dress it with other dressings until it is healed."
de l’aposteme des coions	"On boil on buttocks"
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in wrapping like a boil, with softening of the skin, and the patient moves around crying out when touched.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this disease is quite frightening as well, but nonetheless we will tell you its operation according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then you place the suspensory ligature of the scrotum below your fingers, grasping all nearby vessels close to the penis, and the master ties it off firmly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut through the scrotum with a sharp, wide-bladed knife across the vessels until they are exposed, and then strip each side as we have described in the extraction of arteries in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then he inserts a needle where there is a doubled thread, and ties it to the first place where the wound appeared, and ties it again at the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then the edges are cut evenly straight according to the length of the body, and corrupted moisture is removed from them;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as others where one has been pierced by an arrow, so that no vessel may remain to nourish either end.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For there is no harm from this, and if blood comes from all vessels, then the ends must be drawn together on all vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the bone does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, they dry and cannot help it.
de la routure dou syfac	"Treatment for a broken nose:"
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The outcome of this treatment is through the section that extends to the side or the extension on the abdomen in the area of the groin, which causes the intestines to descend from that opening towards one end.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this rupture is either in the side or due to extension from it, and these two ways come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	From blows, from falls, from kicks, from lifting heavy weights, and similar causes;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the sign that it is due to stretching of the sinews is that it happens gradually over a long time, not suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The abscesses are level with each other down towards the depths because the bowels press against them.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	"And the signs that it is a fracture of the nasal bone itself are that there is sudden pain at the onset, and there is diverse swelling apparent under the skin, due to the escape of intestinal contents through the defect in the nasal bone."
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	"And sometimes the intestines may descend with the fracture and become trapped in it, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed upon."
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	"And these fractures of the nasal bone require careful handling so that they do not happen frequently due to poor treatment."
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of treating it is that you should instruct the patient to press their intestines with their hand inside the wound if possible.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then have him lie on his back between your hands and raise his thighs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then raise the heart above it [the wound] and cut away all the skin from the inner thigh;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert unguent-soaked bandages into the wound according to what you need to open it, so that the bone may come out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then strip away the sinew that is under the skin of the thigh until all around the white tough sinew is exposed;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then insert your two index fingers into what guides the thigh bone, that which is between the white muscle that is under the skin of the thigh and between the second muscle, and separate what is behind the thigh, and between the second muscle.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And then move your right hand inside the hollow of the thighs and stretch the white muscle upwards with your left hand, and lift the thigh up towards the hip bone.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the assistant to stretch the thigh upward and release what is behind the joint.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	Feel your two hands if there is any entrapped intestine or hard white muscle, and if you find anything, put it back into the abdomen below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle with a thick thread made of linen and insert it into the rear part of the muscle that is behind the skin of the thigh.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After the hip bone, then cut the threads that appear from the needle, until there are four left.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then they are assembled one upon the other like a cross, and tied with sinew which is beneath the skin of the testicles, with a strong tie of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the heads of the thighs and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels nourishing them can enter inside, lest a tumor come there;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And then place the tie according to the first tie two fingers away from it, and after these two ties leave enough sinew which is beneath the skin of the testicles for one finger's width;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and finally according to the roundness that the egg carries.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then cut into the part beneath the skin of the testicles until blood flows and the bowels, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then prepare wool moistened in oil and put it on the wound, and bring the tie that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	"And sometimes it may be necessary to cauterize the exposed nasal bone after the incision has been made in case of any bleeding."
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this often happens, and leave the tie until it adheres by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	And if it takes time to fall asleep, let him be aroused with warm water, and apply what we have said until he falls asleep;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then heal the wound with another remedy until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Here is the translation of the given text with a focus on the term "hernie carnosous":
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this art I have never seen anyone dare to perform a cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done like the branch that binds the wrist, in such a way that you tie the vessels lightly after cutting above gently underneath;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then cut into the middle of it and heal the abscess with what opens until the vessels bleed.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes a fracture occurs in bones, as we have said, and the location is revealed;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	And do not leave any of the intestines at the joints, and if some are left, it's little, and repair all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And moreover if it remains too long in this state, the wound becomes inflamed or suppurated until the intestines protrude;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens due to the stretching of the sinew which is at the angles, as we have said, for it becomes stretched and then softened and swollen the joint and opened.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And its treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously stated.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And the patient should lie on their back between your hands; then cut the swollen area of the break with a knife, about three fingers wide.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then pull out the sinew which is under the skin that follows; then take some fat and place it on the exposed area of the sinew.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press it firmly onto the deep part of the abdomen; then sew up both visible areas of the sinew over the top of the fat, sewing one and the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the head of the fat; do not cut into the sinew nor extend the wound or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal prolapse.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then treat with wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse it and heal the wound until it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The infection is confined, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization should be performed more gently at this place, and closer to saving the patient's life.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	Regarding the softening of the skin of the thighs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	The skin of the scrotum is often softened in some men because the flesh inside it becomes softened; this is unpleasant to see.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	It is necessary, when one wishes to treat this condition, for the patient to lie on his back and the skin that has softened should be cut away from the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then sew the two lips together with stitches; if you wish, first sew up the excess softened skin tightly with three or four stitches.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed; then remove the thread.
dou chastrement	Regarding castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that those who practice sorcery are punished in our law, and therefore I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is only necessary to mention it for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	The first reason is that the physician may know how to respond when asked about it, and its treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	And the other, because we often have need of castration of certain beasts to help us, such as of goat and sheep and cat and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that castrations are done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one that we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water until the testicles become softened and pendant;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then grasp them with your hand until they are replaced and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	On castration by cutting:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you tether the beast and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each testicle once when they are well exposed;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave a small hole above and below where the vessels are severed;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this method of castration is more reliable than that done by attraction, because sometimes some part of the testicles remains with attraction, causing the beast to desire lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then heal the wound until it is sound.
des hermofrodites	Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism exists among men in two ways:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One way is that between the two testicles opens also like the form of a woman's nature, having hair and sometimes urine in the area.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way occurs in women: they have upon the pubic hair both like a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	The treatment for both men and women is that you cut away all adherent skin and dress it like other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second manner, for men whose urine passes through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentigine is an adherent skin on the natural part that appears too unsightly to behold;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Some women have it as large as their hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you shave off the excess skin of the tentigine with your hand or scissors, and then cut it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do not cut too deep, lest blood flow excessively, and then dress it like other wounds until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	And there is another wound that arises at the mouth of the womb, and the hymen, and sometimes it swells up like a cow's horn; therefore the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you bind it, as we have said regarding tenting, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	Erratique
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Incorrect if the woman's nature is not pierced, or the hole is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	And it is either natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that has come upon it.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Or it is caused by adhesions of flesh, either thin or thick, and occurs deep within the womb, on the sides, below, or wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And it prevents conception, childbirth, and sometimes menstruation as well.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	The diagnosis of this is made by examination of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the inflammation appears nearby, then seek it in your two ears or in your throat.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is due to thin adhesions, and it extends for two fingers' breadth, then hurry up and round it in this manner:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Join your two index fingers together, with the woman lying on her back and her legs spread apart;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then the two books are fully opened, so that the subtle face is rounded, and the poultices are covered.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool, dampen it in oil, place it on the wound, and have the woman lie face down each day so that it cannot dry.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the shoulder blade is hard and thick, then you must cut it like a bay leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the poultice is of new flesh, then suspend it from the ox's horn and cut it off;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have ready staunching medicines such as aconite, dragon's blood, frankincense, mixed with egg yolk.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then prepare a wide lead plate so that the wound cannot dry out.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	And likewise have ready a tent of dry linen.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let him be treated with other remedies until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh-born matter comes in the wound, it must be cut according to this manner, unless it is an incurable abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an incurable abscess that is in the wound, one should not cauterize with fire.
des emorroides	Emorroides est une maladie de la partie postérieure de l’anus et du périnée, causée par une dilatation veineuse ou un hémorragie de ces veines. Les symptômes incluent le saignement lors de la défécation, la douleur dans la région anale, et des masses dures à cet endroit.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are abnormal openings of veins from which blood usually does not flow, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And as we have said in the division, their similarities, signs, I will say here those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are buried deep in the marrow, and they cannot be felt, then there is no cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the anus, which can be felt, those can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is necessary then that you place the woman in a cold house; then put hot pincers on the navel with tongs and cut it at its roots; then apply powder containing medicines that stop bleeding, such as acacia and dragon's blood incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then place her feet to the fire for an hour, then put her in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if bleeding persists, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall nuts and similar things; then take barley flour, mix it with honey and celery, and apply the plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if she bleeds, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, then apply cupping glasses to her back and breasts without striking them.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take wool, wet it in plantain juice or celery juice with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess is ripe, then treat the wound with ointment until it is clean.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And the one called 'albathir' is red, and resembles a sharp-pointed head, so it should be covered just like the thelul.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then perform treatment until he is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Of boils of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess occur in the martyrdom (i.e., the genitals), such as chancre, pierced abscess, herpes, erysipelas, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in their categories.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is therefore necessary that I discuss in this treatise the hot abscess that appears in the marrow, which is not one of those that boil.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you wish to know the work of iron, look whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore do not hurry to pierce, but let it swell until the pain subsides;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	And then have the patient sit on a chair, and place two small chairs where they can recline, and lean on their back and bring their feet together below the knee.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And let their thighs be spread apart, and place their arms under their knees, and tie them securely with a good bandage;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then follows the removal of the bile towards the right side, and there one brings the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the gallbladder, about which further details come below.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is necessary that when you bring this instrument there, you insert the reed first to know the depth of the gallbladder, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not burn the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the instrument is larger, then one must cover the depth of the gallbladder with rags so that the instrument does not cause pain.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is necessary that he place the funnel of the instrument above and that he moisten the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens and one cuts into it with a gentle hand, then one must cover it at the head, at the upper spine.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the gallbladder is emptied, then you must put in the wound wet bandages in rose oil or in dry green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And place the hot iron of the cautery on the bottom of the wound, and put behind it a wick moistened in water where mallows have been cooked.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then, after two days of applying this ointment, continue until it is healed.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	And sometimes lift the wound and the boil with an enema of water and honey, then with water where roots of lily and long aristolochia have been cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Then apply the ointment again.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is in the marrow, you must beware of cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is first necessary that she know the shape of natural childbirth, and the sign is when you see the woman straining downward, and wanting to smell the air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	Then the child hastens to come out.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	You then know that this birth is according to its natural form, and the head is the first to emerge, along with the afterbirth.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	When you see these signs, gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	Because when he sits on his head, so does his second line with him, and the bridle of his excesses is cleaned by good purification;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And that which comes differently does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	Because sometimes it comes on its feet and the body or head turns upside down, and the hands, or it comes onto its belly, often turning by chance onto its neck, and into other unnatural positions;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Therefore it is necessary that the midwife be wise and skillful in these matters, careful to avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the positions and how to assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes out onto its head naturally, and the woman gives birth screaming, and her strength is weak, then have her sit on a stool or let the women hold her up;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and raise her nature with oil or ground fenugreek cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs the small spatula, of which here is the shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	Cut the navel cord, and clip it with nail clippers until the moisture inside flows out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	And press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must administer a suppository of ground fenugreek mixed with sesame oil to the woman;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	Then make her inhale warm steam and sneeze, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	The child will now be born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands come out first, you must gently push them back in bit by bit;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot be pushed back in, then place the woman on a seat and raise her feet up high;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then suddenly lower the seat to the ground, taking care that the woman does not fall during this maneuver;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the hands still cannot be pushed back in and the child is dying, then cut off the hands at the joint just mentioned, extract the child, and reset it correctly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the birth of a child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes onto its feet, then you must push upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn it gently, little by little, until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then grasp one of the feet and stretch it out gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it can jump up to its thighs, then command it to grasp [the foot], and make it sneeze with conditions.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it were to leap, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he cannot jump as we have said, then turn it bit by bit until it is in its natural shape
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easy
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take musk-rose of old age, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	And put this ointment on the woman's womb, then make her sit in hot water up to below the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when she is moistened underneath, put a collar of myrrh on her and leave it there for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will leap now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the outlet of the child onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When a child comes in this form, then the midwife places her hands softly and gently.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	Then let it be suspended by its neck, with its feet hanging down, lying on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold her hands gently and gently, then she takes her hands to place them on its belly, removing the pillows underneath so that it is well positioned below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not slip out, she takes its feet and pulls firmly, then brings her belly upwards, and then inserts her hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and remove the child gently.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and tell the woman to hold herself back so that the child comes out easily.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the outlet of the child who comes from the thigh, keep one hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to devise a means of reducing dislocation:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be reduced, then make the woman stand up and walk around;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and forcefully extend her legs;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the cataplasm that I have described
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, and then try to reduce the dislocation
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And wean the child according to its natural figure, and let it sneeze, and instruct her to suckle until the child is full.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the outlet of the child on his neck, with his hands spread out and his face turned towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the peasant take his hand, then turn it gently and gently, and weave lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is even, then apply the medicinal plaster of alum and oil, as we have said, and instruct her to move gently.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	Then make her sit on the seat, and tell her to suckle;
et la fai esternuer.	And let her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for all the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When the second milk comes forth in this manner, cut off the second milk with your nail until the moisture is emptied;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the child falls on its face and neck, cut off the skin from the corners so that it does not remain trapped, lest the child die;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then place the child inside until you have positioned it correctly, and instruct the woman to suckle several times:
adonques si istra legierement.	Then it is to be healed easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the outlet of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are often born, sometimes even three or four at a time;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not unusual, it happens quite often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange, and do not live long unless named early;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know them, that they multiply, and are devoured by the wolf who divides them, which is tied to the mouth.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And sometimes they come out as naturally as one all at once, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	If they are born crying, then the treatment should be carried out as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled, doing what she does quickly and easily;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so in such a way that it leads to health.
de plusors enfans	Of several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or even more up to fifteen, and all are perfectly formed like children by the measure of the glorious Creator, and thus the midwife should know everything about this, for such things can happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If it is done as it ought to be.
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman for a dead child or miscarriage, as I have mentioned in the division, and it does not expel, you are compelled by necessity to act with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	Therefore, you must know if the woman is of sound virtue, and whether she has no accidents or fears death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary for the woman to be positioned on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the helper must hold her thigh at two points, or tie it to the bed so that she cannot move during the descent of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oil made from althea and fenugreek and linseed, then anoint your hands with these oils and powders.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then place them gently into the womb, then seek the location where she expelled the waters that are suitable for this purpose, and be careful that if the child is presenting feet first it does not descend headfirst.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If the splinters are in his eyes or neck or mouth or throat or cheeks or under the beard or near the armpits, and if the dislodging is below the feet, he should push or pinch around the middle ribs;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And he should grasp the splinter with his right hand, place the crook between the middle fingers of his left hand, push gently with his whole hand, and insert the splinter into any of these places that we have mentioned, until it reaches its empty destination;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the splinter:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then insert against the other splinter, or the third one if necessary, so that the extraction is even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then pull them evenly by moving from side to side, so that they come out more easily, and the splinter should have teeth for better gripping, as shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there remains a part of it, then he should smear some of his fingers with oil and push them into that part and pull out the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains none, then place this ointment at a higher location, and do so until it has all flowed out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to tension, then you must wrap a bandage around it until all tension is released.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then strike the handcuffs at the joint of the sole or the wrist, and likewise you must do with the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is tight at the outlet, or if there is an acute angle assembled there, then you must insert the spatula spinous between your fingers, splitting the head and extracting the fluid.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or else round it with the instrument called "almidach", with which the shape comes out along with the instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And do the same if the child has a naturally large head.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And then seize the bones with pincers, and if the head jumps forward and is restrained by the forceps, it should be cut, until the moisture in the bone socket comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces with a saw where you can reach.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Should it be swollen in the abdomen or below the ribs, then it must be pierced until the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	"And if the child is on its feet, then traction is easy, and directing towards the mouth of the matrix is also easy."
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is tight in the belly or the wound, then you must pull it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	Open the belly or the wound until the moisture flows out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	And if the other bones are disjointed but the head remains in place, then insert your hand deep into the flesh and pull it up to the entrance of the socket;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then insert one or two fingers and pull it out.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	And if the entrance of the socket is narrowed due to heat from an abscess that has formed there, then one should not work it open; instead, apply moist and greasy things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And the plaster maker uses, and this is in softened and moistening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can make it even, then plaster as we have said in the living child:
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if there is no power, then remove it by sections, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if the plaster as we have said in hot boils that come on the face:
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, then let it be put into tightening water, and the plaster other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman whose womb contained an infant that had died, then another infant became lodged on top of it and also died
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, she developed inflammation in her vulva which swelled so much that it opened up and began to emit a foul odor
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat her, but after pondering for a long time, I could not heal the wound
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attracting plaster and an bone emerged, then after several days another one appeared
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly astonished by this, for the womb has no bones
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I concluded that they were bones from a dead infant
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I sought the wound, and pulled out many bones, until the woman was better.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman lived a long time thus, and sometimes a little bit of bowel came out from there;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wrote this chapter only so that when the master finds something strange, he may know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	"to bring the dislocation back into place"
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Hereafter follows the form of the pressure, by which books are weighed;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Also, turn to page two for the heads of the ribs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	And always, let the horn be more subtle in restraining, and make it from ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the wood should be two fingers wide, and its edges one palm and a half long;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two ribs there should be two joints of this same wood, which close firmly on both ends, half a palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these two joints are placed in the mouth of the mallet to open it when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made from ebony or boxwood wood, according to the shape of pliers;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	And it should have two joints at each head, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	And when you want to open the mallet with all the instruments, then have the woman sit on a bed, feet hanging down and legs spread apart, then insert the two joints together into the mallet, and hold the head of the instrument under her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then open your hand to all the instruments, just as you have done evenly with the forceps, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the abscess, until the boil does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all mounted, and their appearances are multiplied;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the physician has prepared them, the work goes faster, and the higher for men because of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	"Do not disdain the instrument until you have prepared it, for its necessity is not excusable."
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must command the woman to hold her breath, then make her sneeze with condition, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she sneezes because of this, all is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then take hot water, and make a hole or an opening, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the abscess, such as celandine, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centory;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then place a tube through the hole of the pot and put the other end into the mouth of the patient, keeping it there until the steam enters the patient.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	"If the membranes are expelled quickly."
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if she remains afterward and is not completely healed, command the maiden to wet her left hand in sesame oil or in ground iris and then place it on the navel, pressing gently.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little straightly so that the patient does not fall during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but one must move it gently to right and left, then pull gently
si venra et se desaerdra.	then it will come out and be freed.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the patient is too narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	If it does not come from any joint we have spoken of, then ensure you do not err in its treatment.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But you must tie what is at the mouth of the womb to the woman's hip, then perform a clyster with terebinth wax.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	If it can be extracted and replaced, then fire will come.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	However, when it is extracted, if a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Therefore, foments suitable for this are required:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	The ancients have proven that fumes from watercress and dried figs are beneficial.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	"The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman during the retention of the flowers and membranes is as follows:"
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	It is like a snake's head in appearance, with the subtleties of nature placed at its top, and wide branches above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let there be fumes on the coals, and continue until the wick is spent, then begin another.
de percier lou fondement	"to pierce the anus"
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born whose anus is not open but obstructed by some subtle membrane:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, it is necessary for the woman to pierce that boil with her thumb, and not touch it with her nail, and cleanse the clothing so she does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place wet linen soaked in wine and oil, then treat with salve until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	"And if you doubt that it has not healed, then place a tube of lead in the opening and leave it there for a few days, removing it when the child is ready to be taken to its room."
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this swelling comes suddenly from a wound or abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	If it happens suddenly:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	then treat it as we have said for the boil of the buttocks.
de la fistule dou fondement	"of the fistula of the anus"
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come under the anus are nodular and growths that come near the anus or in the space of the buttocks are also considered fistulas, one or more;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when this nodule is chronic and grows, it emits moist white pus or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas persist;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	They are recognized by those who experience emission of wind or ventosity during evacuation, and sometimes a worm jumps out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And there are fistulas that extend to the bladder, and halfway down the penis.
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And they reach as far as the hip joint, and as far as the buttock's point.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the fistula that perforates the anus, but does not perforate:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and stick your two index fingers into the anus and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula where there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has tortuosity, insert a thin reed or horsehair into it until you feel the reed or hair with your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of pus or wind or bile from the opening, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not penetrate.
si te haste dou curer.	If you hurry to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	"And when the fistula is perforating up to the bladder or up to the urethra, urine comes out of it and cannot be healed by medications."
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced as far as the hip joint, then the reed will come up to that place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting and the source of pain cannot be found, then it is always worse, and there is no use in applying medicine or poultice immediately.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And for these Persian fistulas, there is no cure other than labor, and the foolishness of those who meddle with them in vain.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In those that are not Persian and are not ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced; and it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back between your hands.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And lift their legs up to their thighs, and let their thighs be inclined towards their belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then place an awl or a probe if there is twisting, until you know where the opening is located.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around their anus, then you must insert your two index fingers there; now you will know if the awl has pierced.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And when you feel between your fingers either the sinew or the flesh, then know that it is a Persian fistula.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If one does not work at it, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said everywhere that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid one does there, if it is to heat the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	And place everything hot into the fistula until it reaches the bottom;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this twice or three times until you know that these broken vessels have been burnt, which resemble an ostrich feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then use warm compresses to rub until this vessel comes out, then apply ointment inside the wound and around it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is healed thus, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If not, it cannot be healed otherwise.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if the tent enters and does not pierce all the way to the base which is at the bottom, and between your two fingers and the tent there is a thick layer of flesh or fat, then you see the fistula coming out through this fatty covering.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If you cut off the beginning of the fistula, and push it forward again, and then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the tip of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	And the tent will be delivered, and it will fall.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	Then cleanse those shattered bones that resemble a bird's feather, and leave none remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	"If the sinew breaks and tears between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or strong medicine."
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery combines two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 namely, the burning of these joined bones and the draining of blood and drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then for wet tents in furuncles or broken skin, burn until the place is bare and the burned bone emerges from the boil;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound with quick-acting oils that soften hard flesh; these are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	"For when it is cauterized in this way, it is truly cured and does not return."
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	"And if the fistula comes right down from the fundament and is far from the body, push your thumb into the fundament and search for it."
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and between two there is cloth or skin or bone where it is about to burst, then make an opening with confidence and hope by administering one of these three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	When you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it all the way down to the bottom, then insert tents there if possible and treat it first.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not go too deep lest you cut the tissue that holds the fundament, causing unwanted evacuations to occur there.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then treat it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	Perhaps it will then be healed, or you may remove that covering and clean it after cutting near the fundament using a tent or other pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then cleanse the faulty flesh in the wound as much as possible;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study how to heal the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	So that it may be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And there are some fistulas that follow this manner
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	That is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is located near the fundament on the skin above, then take a pierced tent with this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	"And tie one end of a thread to the top of the tent, then insert the tent all the way into the fistula until it reaches its tip."
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it pierces the margin of the foundation within, then pull out the thread of that hole, so that you push your thumb into the foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and draw the head of the thread, and bring the two heads together, and tie them to each other, leaving it for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and tighten it occasionally until the threads cut through those tissues that are between them, and lie flat.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then heal the wound until it is closed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	"If the fistula does not burst open on its own, make it do so by any means you can, unless it is too deep."
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"For it would not be good to cut too deeply and then treat it as we have described until it is healed;"
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spina bifida deformity from which a fistula is opened is usually angular, with one side concave and the other convex;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand it may not be, because you should not cut what you should not cut, as you can see here
des emorroydes	"hemorrhoids"
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Worms are of two kinds:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Either they are within the fundament like grains of resin, some small and others large, with blood constantly flowing from them, and there may be one or several, and they are defective in the fundament and at the head of the fundament;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those that are displaced have little moisture, and often contain a bit of yellow bile or a bit of blood, having the color of flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those who have them within the fundament is to instruct the patient to strain while walking in chambers until the haemorrhoids come out and become apparent.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	So hurry, and take it with forceps or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its root.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the forceps cannot hold them due to their moisture, take them with a cloth, cotton, or a piece of linen.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	Then pull them out with your two fingers, cut them off, and apply some warm powders in place of cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the haemorrhoid cannot come out, clusterize the patient with a biting and sharp enema to wash what is in the fundament so that it can come out clearly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If the patient can't sit up on their own, and if the threads were fiery at their base, then the treatment is easy.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Then you should grasp them with your fingernail or forceps, cut them off, then cauterize them as we have said until they are clean and the incision by iron is feared.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary that you arrange the suturing in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread, insert it into a needle, then draw the thread upwards and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle; let it be wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And pull the thread tightly, then tie the knot, remove the needle, and do likewise for all the others; leave one loose to absorb any excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place on the wound a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or wax, and cover it, instructing the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let them fall until they drop, and once they have fallen, heal them with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	"For the drying of the fissure in the fundament:"
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	"Often times a fissure occurs in the intestines due to drying, and this can happen naturally or when the patient is old and medication is ineffective."
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you scrape off the outer skin of the boil with the point of a lancet or your nail to prevent it from getting wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then heal it until it is solid as it should be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot heal, then resume scraping more forcefully than before until it heals completely and the skin is peeled off.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal it until it is healed.
dou fremit	"For trembling:"
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A formice is a small hole made by an ant that goes very deep into the body;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes cold finds it, and he feels almost like dead from trembling, and it comes throughout the whole body, but more so in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment for this is that you take a feather from a goose or a strong crow's feather and place it on the trembling so that the circle covers the trembling entirely;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to the entire bone until you encircle the quivering, then place it deep and press down on the roots of the quivering.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	"And if you wish to do this with a feather of brass or iron, then do it in this manner, and make sure that it is thin underneath and sharp above:"
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Nor pierce it, so as not to hold onto both sides, or squeeze too hard.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, cauterize the quivering, as is discussed in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	"Of the form of a clyster:"
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes a silver or lead enema is given, or melted copper or brass;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and sometimes these small and large instruments are used, according to the person for whom they are intended.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	"Therefore, those that are used for the treatment of children and those who are weak and sickly should be small;"
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	"The form of a small or large clyster is as follows: wide where the belly is bound according to this manner:"
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is constipation or the belly is bound up, as you see, and the feces are pierced within;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and there are two perforations on one side and one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the belly should have medicine placed inside a beast's bladder or parchment pouch, pierced all around with small holes, with one inch of space between each hole. Then insert strong thread made from coarse yarn twisted into an 'X' shape or wrapped around, and tie the belly closed like a goat's udder.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument ahead with a strong thread, then enema.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the head of the enema with oil or egg white, or something similar, then insert it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the minister squeezes with both hands together until it is all out, then remove the enema, and the patient lifts their legs towards the bed, and if the medicine wants to come out, tie as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if he sleeps a whole night like that, it will be more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you perform a clyster in an illness where the belly is inflamed and the medicine rushes out quickly, then repeat it until it is healed."
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscess, let the enema also be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And this is the form of the subtle enema where the skin is stretched
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	I will tell you about treatments of hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and what they are made with."
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Things by which wounds are made are by blow of stone, and cut of sword or dagger, or spear or club or arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Or made according to the locations on the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck or head or buttocks or belly, or liver, and similar limbs.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, since the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, you should consider whether it was caused by a blow of stone or similar things, and if the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, then you may doubt hot swelling.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	Then cleanse it quickly with the cephalic [cephalic vein] itself, especially if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the cleansing be contrary to the wounded part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And when the patient has finished his consumption of wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not wish to improve, then let his food be made smaller, and let him neither drink wine nor eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And place on the wound, if an abscess should come about, cotton soaked in oil cooked only, or in stringent wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood and not moved by the air, powder that I will mention later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the air has moved it, then place on it some ointments until it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like one from a sword cut and similar ones, and its lips cannot be brought together by binding alone, then bring them together by stitching, as I shall say regarding wounds of the belly, concerning stitches.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is open to the bone, and deep, and hangs only by a little, then cut it.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat fatty foods such as testicles and cooked wheat, also poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rottenness in the skin, but it hasn't reached the bone, cut away all the rotting part and burn it with fire, then treat [the wound].
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped from bleeding with medications alone, then seek out the artery. And if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help, cauterize [the artery].
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and this is what you should do: put in this powder that seals before the wound closes.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And here is how to make the powder:
pren encens une partie;	Take frankincense, one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	Dragon's blood, two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	Grind this finely and fill the wound, binding it tightly until it is well-closed and joined with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	And then bind it well and leave it without removing [the bandage], unless it swells;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Because one does not remove medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	Sometimes heat alone is applied when incense or dragon's blood are not available, but only after the art has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has moved, especially in summer, do not apply this powder there;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digested oils or poultices made from barley flour and water mixed with honey, until it softens.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about fractures of the head later on.
de la plaie dou col	"of the neck wound"
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	"If a wound comes on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut."
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy but to leave it alone and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retract.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not apply anything cold to the wound, because the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuity extends to the brain, which is the highest organ.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But let the medication be warm, such as hot water washed in warm water mixed with rose oil and cooked likewise in warm water, and other mineral stones according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the wound is large, then suture and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals."
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if wounds are deep and blood has gathered and is full of bowels, then pierce it below or even lower.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and blood flows profusely, then dress it, bandage it, and cauterize it if necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the spine of the throat is cut or the heart, and the windpipe is guarded so that the flesh goes there, then cut the heart from the throat's artery, but do not touch the throat; rather, reset it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then constrain it carefully, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with warm compresses until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has impressed upon the bone, then scrape it away.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And if there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can; if not, leave the wound to suppurate until it is dressed and drained.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	"And if there are bones and fistulas in the wound, then treat it as I said in its chapter."
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	"on wounds from a lance or a dagger"
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it's a cut from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, observe if wind comes out of the wound as the patient breathes.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	then know that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it's not deep but full of fresh blood, do not apply the powder at first nor bind it so that the blood does not flow too deeply and reach the heart, killing the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but apply an attractive ointment and bandage it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you have no ointment, place damp cotton in the wound to draw out moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	So that there will be no spasm, nor harmful trembling of the heart, nor shortness of breath;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see these favorable signs, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it with splints and other treatments until it is healed.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	And if it cannot heal or close, know that there is a fistula present;
si la cure si com on doit.	If the treatment is performed as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and is simple, whether on the front or back, then treat the one that is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If it is large, stitch it;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	And if it is small, use powder; and if it is close to the bone and has taken chips of bone, clean the wound, and treat any broken bones;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not broken, leave the wound to fester until it is ready for extraction;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	"on rupture of the abdomen"
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	Abdominal pain can be severe, moderate, or mild;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	Sometimes with a large wound, the intestine or mesentery jumps out,
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the stitching is more difficult; sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because if one puts too many intestines back in place, unless they are put back together carefully.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Therefore, the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, causing them to return too soon; thus, it is better to move the wound slightly so that one can put the intestines back in place correctly rather than in other ways.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that a hole in the belly comes about in four ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The first two are common stitches that occur during abdominal surgery; the other two stitches for wounds on other parts of the body are also common in other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Yet they are more suited to abdominal surgery, and I will discuss each one and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, nothing of the intestines has spilled out, and there is little need to repair it, this can be done in one of the two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	For due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen with cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when he is cold, warm him in this way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Soak a sponge or soft cloth in hot water only, or cook in boiling water with cumin and cypress seed, and warm the intestines until the swelling is gone;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes this restricting wine is made, and it is believed to help reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling begin to subside, then moisten the intestines with water in which alfalfa and mallow have been cooked, for by this means the entrance is eased somewhat;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it still cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first cure is believed to be better than the cut, so none should cut without great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the instrument for splitting [it]:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If you cut within the curve and do not go beyond it, see here its shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines leap out, then carefully replace them according to their natural form in their proper place if you have the power, for this is worth more.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and located below the belly, you must make the patient lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	And if it is located below the belly, raise the head and chest higher than the lower parts; likewise, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, make sure that the injured part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus you must arrange what I say for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, put on what you are equipped with, then have between your hands one cloth moistened with which you gently wipe the entire wound and bring together the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common way of suturing: first take one or more needles according to the quantity and width of the wound, then leave two spaces from the beginning of the wound, and attach a strong thread to the needle.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	And pierce the two heads of skin with the two heads of sinew, which are underneath the skin within, until you make it pierced from that part, and join the two heads of sinew together in fours.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then tie a doubled thread around the needle on both sides, then bring together the two heads of the wound evenly, and leave two spans apart, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing so according to what you need needles for, until all the wound is constrained.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles cut through all flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore they must be medium-sized;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	And do not push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before it is sewn.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And then cut the heads of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping; and place tents or cloths on the heads of the needles to keep them still until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, where only one or two needles are sufficient.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common, which involves sewing the two heads of skin and the two heads of flesh together with one needle having a medium-strength thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And once you have pierced all three heads together, then draw the needle back to where you started, in the manner that one sews cloth.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	Leave the thickness of a barleycorn between each stitch.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch closes the wound; I sewed a wound that one man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife and was more than a palm's length wide, and it opened to expose two palms' worth of intestines.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I reset the intestines after it had been twenty-four hours since the blow, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, which I dressed, and it remained healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physicians judged that he would die, but it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and twice daily I placed old cotton on the wound and washed it with honey water until it was clean.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you two proper methods of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and pass it from the outer part to the inner.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the heart from right to left, then place the end of the silk thread where you inserted the needle and pierce it on the other side from inside to outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the meaning of this stitch is that you should sew like a furrier sews furs, leaving the silk thread once on one side and taking it up again on the other until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of suturing, which Galen describes specifically, is as follows: some people join the two parts naturally together and apply one end of the suture to the other in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Stitch a needle at the near end of the thread and pierce only that spot, leaving both ends of the suture.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside part until it reaches the inside, at both ends of the suture.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce both ends again from the outside to the inside in two other places near each other on the other side
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the best and most common method of suturing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen also says that one should suture the abdomen with two needles each having thread on them
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one must insert one needle on this side and the other on that side in the manner of those who sew leather
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And know this: when the ulcer is inside the belly, then the stitching is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	And it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, before the art has moved it, then reset the intestines and the stitch.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	Then put powder around the flesh, and if the wound has moved, then put some ointment that is available, so that the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And cut the thread, and may the lips be closed, and the edges.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound like others until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you have no medicines, then put on cotton wool soon after it begins to discharge, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For in many dispositions when wounds are simple, you need no other medicine;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main members, then it is necessary to moisten clean linen in warm rose oil or rose oil and place it around the angles and under the armpits.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if he feels pain or corruption in his bowels, and this happens often, then apply black wine enemas, especially if the corruption reaches the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierce within it, knowing that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	Injuries to the intestines called 'jejunum' cannot heal, due to the thinness of their vessels and the delicacy of the entire body, and their closeness in nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	If the bowel protrudes from the wound, then push it back in as with the intestines while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and turned black or green, then tie off the black part to prevent blood flow, for there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut what is between the tie, and place the two ends hanging down from below the wound until it reaches far to facilitate the extraction when the bowel drops, and the wound gapes.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bowel
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are wound around each other, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, for I have seen that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and the digestion and wind passed through it;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment as best I could there, and did not cease to cleanse until he was free of infection, and the area was sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it healed, I worried that the patient might have some injury in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	but there was no harm, he simply remained in better condition, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take a thread with large knots, then bring the lips of the wound together, and when the thread has opened its mouth, place it on both lips so that it pulls its mouth shut.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then he cuts off the head, and this is held so that it cannot be untied; then he puts another stitch afterwards in this manner as before until the wound is completely closed.
et cout la plaie.	Then close the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	Such a head will harden in the intestines and cause no harm to the patient, and the intestines can be tied with a fine thread that is cut from an animal's intestine in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this intestine thread that is very lean, and then tie at its end a thin twisted linen thread; then insert the thread into the needle and stitch up the intestine, and draw it back together.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this manner of sewing with stitches is used only according to trustworthy and hopeful ways;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the large intestines, then there is no remedy or health except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	"whether it is a fistula or wherever it may be,"
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it grows large, is universally called "fistula," and likewise when it becomes hollow and sinks inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	A fistula is truly a broken vein, hard and white, where there is no pain felt, and it is also called like the feathers of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes it appears clear and thin, but other times thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes small, and other times quite large.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not clean and has no flesh, appears only through one of the eight causes.
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	That is to say, because of the thickness of blood or flesh.
ou por sa malice;	Or due to its wickedness.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that prevents flesh from forming.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	'Or when there is too much bile.'
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Or where the place is putrid, and the matter is of poor quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Or because the medication used for treatment is not good.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	'Or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence.'
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Or because the property in that region is slow digestion, delayed healing, and naturally inflamed.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medicinal remedies in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	"Now it is fitting that I tell you about the cure of fistula which is done by manual work:"
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	A fistula happens in every limb of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the face, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And there are some that come from the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that are like this are difficult to heal, and there is only labor and ignorance involved;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I mentioned, and you have confidence in its treatment, and you recognize it, then take a tent of lead or iron, apply it to the fistula.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the fistula is twisted, search it with a subtle probe of lead, for lead bends around the twistiness.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the fistula has many holes and you cannot search it well with probes, then irrigate it through one of the holes, for moisture will pass from one hole to another and cleanse it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then squeeze it as hard as you can to see if there is bone or nerve inside it, and how deep it goes. Ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when you press your hand on it, and where they feel it most.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And once you know truly where it is and if it is far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein or in any of the places I told you about, then cut according to what I told you, and remove the fracture and the rotted flesh that are inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then treat it until it is healed. And if the fistula is very deep in the right place, you must cut as deeply as you can, and then insert moist probes soaked in hot water into the fistula up to its head, so that the medicine corrode the excess flesh remaining at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I apply dressings made from holy flesh until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it does not heal with this [treatment], then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is rotted by the fistula, cut it off.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not trouble you in the main members [limbs], as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is exposed and there is decay and blackness, scrape it until all the decay is removed, then dress it with holy flesh until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if it does not heal, return again as before; know that you have not yet reached the source:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	So uncover and search until you reach the bottom, remove all the corruption, then restore it to its proper place.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it heals thus, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	But if not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other means but to let nature take its course
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is a small rotten bone and you can grasp it with forceps, then extract it with the appropriate tool; but if there are many bones, pull them all out, leaving none behind
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if moisture is causing harm and there is no error or fear, then cut away the moisture, flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something irritating on the wound to cause decay around the bones; then when the place has rotted around the bones, they will come out more easily
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is a large bone like that of the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackness is gone; then restore the wound
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is much decay and it reaches close to the surface of the bone
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	Then it should be cut all the way down to the decay, and then cured until it is solid.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	A young man around 30 years old had pain in his leg from an internal cause. Matter accumulated in the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, but there was no apparent reason to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the foolish doctors insisted on opening it until the abscess ruptured, releasing much matter. It became a fistula with many holes through which bowels and pus from the body discharged.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	For two years many doctors tried to treat it, but none with any skill in the art of medicine. I was called in and saw his leg and the remedies they were using, as well as what was flowing out through the holes in great quantity.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The young man's body became red, with a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, then searched all the holes, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	So I hurried and cut into one of the holes until I exposed part of the bone. It was found to be decayed and perforated, with corruption reaching the inner bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw those which appeared to me of the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other corruption besides that which I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And began to dress the wound with healing medicines for a long time, but could not heal it.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And then resumed [the treatment], and discovered the bone as before, and found that the corruption had spread to the bone itself, and I removed it, and tried to heal the wound.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	Yet still I could not, so I cut around about a palm's breadth of bone, and removed it entirely, then dressed the wound with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it was soon healed and sound, but the patient could not endure further treatment due to his weakness, and because of his fear of death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the purpose of bloodletting was often performed, but he was entirely healed afterwards, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and he was of good disposition and had no harm nor contradiction at all, neither oncoming nor departing.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if a bone is broken anywhere in the body, it must be treated thus:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take linen, and bind it tightly at the end of the exposed bone, and instruct him to stretch his arm upward;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And place another linen bandage, thicker than the first, and tie it over the flesh that is above the bone, so that you pull out the corrupt flesh underneath and uncover the flesh on the spot where the wound should be, so that the bone does not ulcerate the flesh.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And place a stick or a board underneath the bone to move the corrupt flesh away.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And this should be done until one can see and feel the corruption, and again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	If the bone is corrupted but does not appear open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, uncover all the flesh.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then place a stick underneath, and then scrape the corruption from one side to the other with a spoon that is as long as the corruption, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	If the corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint and scrape the bone that contains it from the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than surgery.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if corruption is at the wrist of the hand or the ankle, it is very serious indeed, but nonetheless you must investigate that corruption and how it appears.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	Cleanse it in every way possible, provided that neither vein nor nerve opposes you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And know that there are many kinds of saws and needles for cutting these bones according to the position of the bones and their appearance from within, as well as their thickness, fineness, length, shortness, and hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And therefore one must prepare each tool suitable for its respective operation.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And know that your work will show you which tool you need according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the ways of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Therefore, choose the tool you need based on what is appropriate for it.
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head swells either due to internal cause or due to lack of heat;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And once you have treated that inflammation with medication and remedies, but they are not beneficial, then it is necessary to amputate the limb up to the point where the inflammation begins, so that the patient escapes death or the greater harm of losing the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the sign is that the limb becomes black as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackening, this corruption then spreads from limb to limb, affecting the entire body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Therefore, hasten to amputate, especially if it is due to the sting of venomous creatures like marine scorpions or snakes and similar ones; but if the corruption has reached the joint of two fingers, then cut there, but do not allow it to progress up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches the hand, amputate at the joint so that corruption does not spread to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	And if it comes to the arm, cut at the elbow.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And if it passes the elbow, death ensues, and no amount of external remedies can help by their power.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	Similarly happens when corruption comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it comes to the first joint, cut after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it comes to the heel, cut off the whole heel.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it rises in the leg, cut at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	The manner of cutting off or cauterizing the limb is thus: tie it above and below, extend one assistant downwards along one of the ties, and another upwards along the other tie, and cut away the flesh between the two ties with a broad-bladed knife until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cut or cauterize it, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the cautery does not touch the healthy flesh, lest another injury and abscess occur to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if blood flows during your operation, cauterize the wound immediately, applying some powder that stops bleeding.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medication until it is complete, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it heals.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to a man in sum pity:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	a blackening appeared on him as if burned by fire, and this corruption first came upon his right foot, spreading to cover the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the man saw the corruption, he quickly covered his foot with a copper plate, and it healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	Many years later the corruption returned on his right hand, and he came to me. After cleansing his body, I applied things that reflect heat, but the corrosion did not stop.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he asked me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to because I still hoped to drive back the matter with reflection.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	And I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the virtue of man was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And he despaired altogether and returned to his land, and hurried to cover his hand, and he recovered.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have heard this told only for the purpose that one may do otherwise when there is need.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess comes to a very tender place and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of bowel.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then it becomes round and breaks open, and the bowel jumps out, and the place remains empty, like an old vessel.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin that is above it is also as thin as delicate cloth, and does not reach down to the bone or to the nerve, and such a disease is called 'sound,' and is not called 'fistula'.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it extends so far that it reaches to the bone and goes deep, then it is called 'fistula'.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And you must cut around this skin, especially when it is thin, just like a cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	But do not worry about its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you suspect that the skin will spoil, but the decay is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then prepare a clyster like this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Look if the breast is large and the bowel emitting it has a foul odor, then use an Egyptian clyster made like this:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take equal parts of hellebore, oil, and litharge, and cook them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	Then take what you need according to your requirement, mix it with water and honey, and use it for a clyster on the breast, closing the anus.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Repeat this many times until the breast is cleansed and the foulness is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And sometimes water with ashes is used for a cleansing when this medicine is not present; you should take ashes of vine wood, pour on water, then strain it, and use it as an enema until you know that the breasts are well cleaned.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	And if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the water with ashes, then use an enema of water and honey, with a little bit of ground orpiment.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	Or you may use an enema of honey and mixed wine, for the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the blood thinner.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And once you have done this and are confident that the breasts are well cleansed, then use an enema of what causes flesh to be born there; you should take emplastrum diachilithon and mix it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	Or you may use an enema of some medicines and ointments, the properties of which I have mentioned when treating about ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	If the hole of the breast is small and the tube of the clyster cannot enter it, then enlarge it slightly with an iron tool, and place a wick of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is widened.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If the wound is too wide, leave only enough skin to allow for the insertion of the clyster tube, and if the hole that the bowel throws up is above, cut it lower down or where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowels are deep, do not allow any flesh to intervene;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cut the breast below as you see it, then prepare in such a way that the bowel runs to its lowest point, for when the bowel is deep, do not allow any flesh to intervene; and if you cannot cut the breast below as you see it,
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so that the bowel may run easily downward, leaving nothing of the bowel;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	And take medicines to consolidate for placing on the wound, they are placed on the linen cloth which covers all of the wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then cut as far as you can around the hole of the breast with a larger cut than the first one, then apply soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the wound to alleviate the pain, but do not remove the outer large cloth until after many days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And the one on top of the hole of the breast removes often to remove the pain, and know what comes out of the wound, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And beware if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when this medicine has spread in such a way you see what kind of matter comes out of the wound, then know that the breast has already healed, and the health approaches.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then unbind it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open the wound, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	"And if after many days the breast still discharges undigested bowels, know that the breast has not yet healed."
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons are contracted after a long time, do not despair of health, for recovery approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men whose flesh wounds take too long to heal, and those that heal too quickly;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if undigested food jumps suddenly from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach is not functioning properly;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	And if the stomach is slow to digest and is distant from its proper state, apply drying medications that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as diaphanous ointment, for it contains much vitriol, which is the final medication.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take diaphanous ointment, and they make it with rose oil, and rose water equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	Then mix it together and use it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And similarly, cooked honey is more effective when diaphanous ointment is not available. Take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense, grind them together, and powder them onto the honey while it is on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And then glue the drapell, and stretch it over the breast, and sometimes one administers an aristologus longum, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like powdered centory.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in use of simples or of compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them and make powder of it, and put on the honey that I have said, and use
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the wound is prolonged, and not cured by this treatment, know that the corruption has gone deep, causing an impression on the bone in hard members or joints
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if it is the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the boil of the fingernail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or foot, or sometimes arises in other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it is neglected and becomes old, then a hard abscess forms, which cracks and swells so much that it reaches the root of the nail, sometimes even cracking the entire nail
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Corrosion reaches the bone, causing foul-smelling pain; the thigh is doubled over, and the skin appears ashen.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all, then you must cut away with iron all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is a great help if the bones are healthy, and the nail is sound;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to prick, and the sore appears, then you must place a hot iron under the nail that pierces the flesh, and hold it there; carefully cut away the affected flesh and apply burning and corrosive medicines to remove all of it;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion reaches the bone, cut it away and cauterize with fire, because as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see that both are corrupting, cut them off at their base just like what was mentioned before, then treat until they are healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if he is wounded, impaled, and feels great pain, then you must heal him first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the corner of the nail at an angle using a pair of scissors, but be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, then put something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain in the wrist
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that are sometimes found in some men's hands by chance are entirely fleshy, and sometimes there is bone or claw, and sometimes they arise from the root of the joint, where the birth is on some of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those born with a knot on the thumb cannot move, and those born at the joint of the thumb may be able to move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The incision on the fleshy one is easy, in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a wide pair of scissors.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those born at the root of the joint are difficult to treat:
si te tien dou coper.	So hold on tightly while cutting.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In him who is born with a hard knot at the shoulder, first you must cut around the flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable knife, and then scrape it until it is clean.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The scabs that come on both toes together are caused by birthmarks or scars from wounds or burns or similar things.`
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you must cut that nail, so that the thumb returns to its natural shape;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two cloths or gauze soaked in rose oil so they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Where you place between two pieces of thin lead until the spot is closed as it ought to be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If scabs come on any of his toes with the palm, cut off that adhesion as necessary;`
des vils	of the wicked
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The eyes are large veins enclosed and filled with melancholic impurities that come from many members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you should administer to him sometimes a purge for the colon, and then treat it with the basilica remedy.`
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	There are two ways to treat with iron:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One way is to cut them and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is to tie off the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cutting is done in this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, raise the leg with hot water very strongly until the thick blood is thinned out, then hold the leg of the patient above the hip joint down to below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in one place or two or three with a wide cut, then lift and draw out the black blood with your hand from one end to the other until as much blood comes out as the virtue of the patient can bear.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	Then apply a poultice, and instruct him to bind himself with fresh meat around a black cloth.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And resume the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, but this harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The raising of him is done in this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Raise the patient's leg if there is much hair on it, then place him in a bath, and apply hot water to the leg until it becomes red and the veins swell;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	If you have no bath, heat him by the fire, and then make an incision on the vein near the long bone at the top of the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin with an awl and strip the vein from each side until it appears when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And when it is seen red and black, and enters the skin, it seems like a white thread;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then place a hook underneath so that it lifts the vein from the skin, and gently strike it with an awl, then make another incision three fingers above;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scrape off the skin above the vein until it appears; then lift it at the root, as you have done before, and tie it to another sinew, as you did initially.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then cut another incision, or several if necessary; then lift it and cut at the two ends of the foot; then draw it out and lift it up to the second incision.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then pull it out from incision to incision until it all comes out; then cut it off.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then insert a needle with strong doubled thread, tie it, pull it out, place it under the root, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure it does not break off, for if it breaks, you cannot pull it out or lift it, and this harms the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And once you have completely treated it, place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound's location
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him treat until he is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the face is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cut all of it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron used to cut the face is curved and does not cut straight, so that it does not cut into the vein
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and its curve should be large because if it were fine, it would cut into the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein enters the legs, in warm parts where no grass or tree grows, and on land where there is no moisture
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to rot that comes from under the skin, as when it enters the body like a serpent or worm, embedded between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that there appears a very large inflammation on the leg, then the location changes, and the vein starts to protrude like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound opens, you should wrap around it a piece of linen measuring about one and a half spans up to two spans, and tie it, leaving the linen hanging on the leg; every time blood flows out at the front, you should wrap it around the linen and retie it
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap the remaining portion, and do not cut at its root, so that it is all exposed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut it, it will enter into the flesh, causing an abscess and decay in that place, and evil disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Therefore, it must be treated bit by bit until its head, leaving nothing remaining on the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And sometimes this vein, when treated from the length of two palms or three, and once a man came to me whose was four palms long; when you cut it, insert one finger into the hole, and pierce it until its bottom so that all comes out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And let the matter within be emptied, and apply medicines around it to prevent decay for several days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes there are many arrows in this vein, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and there are many holes from which blood flows;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This illness is called in our land "cattle disease", because it happens often to oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body moving up and down, and one can feel it well as it travels from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and leaps forth.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as come worms, serpents, flies, and roundworms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and its harmfulness is doubted because when it goes through the body and reaches the head, it comes to the eye by chance, enters it, and destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	And this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being treated and drawn out, one can only be sure that it is when it moves:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	Therefore you must tie the limb above and below with a strong and tight ligature, then cut into it and draw out the worm, and if the worm is buried deep in the flesh and you cannot find it, cauterize the spot with fire until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greatest harm it causes is that it damages the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	And if you see it coming near the head by the eye, press down on it firmly with your eyebrow, then cut upwards, and pull out the feather;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And the patient should use cleansing of body with medicinal solvents to remove corrupt humors, and avoid consuming rotten foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	due to pain caused by windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called in our land 'vakivir', and it is a pain that comes to certain limbs and then moves from limb to limb;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was summoned to a woman who was ill, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and soon after, it rose up like a worm to her shoulder, quickly as anything, just like quicksilver moving from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain then left that spot and struck into her shoulder, and soon afterwards it spread throughout her body, so that it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that she kept turning around her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	"I wondered greatly how she could move thus from limb to limb because I had never seen this disease behave in such a way."
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I had seen many times that there was great pain moving from one place to another, but I had never seen it like this in a woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because the woman had dry skin, with veins exposed, and thus this constraint of wind appeared;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	But they do not experience this according to this reason in those who are dislocated, who have moist skin and concealed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain which we have spoken of, quickly place your hand above and below it, and then strike until that constrained wind leaves its place;
et cauterize le leu;	And cauterize the location;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you cannot see it with your eyes, then treat it with things that expel wind, such as fetid pills and pills of saffron, and similar other remedies.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	"Sighs are various according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they occur."
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The varieties of them are such that there are those which have large points, small ones, hairy ones, and smooth ones.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And there are those with two edges, those with tongues, and those with fragments
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	And those that fall onto any limb do so in one of two ways
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or onto the main members, such as head, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar organs
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls into any of these locations, the signs of death that I will tell you about hereafter become apparent to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you must beware of extracting this arrow for afterwards many deaths occur in various ways
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And if this bad sign does not appear to you and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	The sign of the head when the arrow strikes it and pierces the bone is when there is sudden faintness, twitching, swelling, redness in the eyes, inflammation of the tongue, spasm, loss of consciousness, vomiting bile
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	And perhaps it lacks fire from the nose, or ears.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And perhaps it loses speech and voice
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And there flows from the wound moist white pus like pigeon's dung, and also burns the flesh like fire.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if this sign appears to you, then take care of it, and pull out the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign that an arrow has struck the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And perhaps the arrow moves like a pigeon, and dark blood is cut off, and coldness and cold sweat come on, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Then know for certain that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	"The signs of a sigh that has entered the lung are that foam comes forth from the wound, the throat swells up, the patient changes color and sighs loudly and asks for cold air."
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the lung, it is near the little ribs.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	And there is great pain and sighing and sorrow.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	All the shoulders' members move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	"And if a sigh falls into the stomach, sometimes undigested food may emerge from the wound."
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	"And if a sigh falls into the abdomen and much wind rushes out through the intestines, there is no hope for recovery or for drawing out the sigh."
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine flows out and there is fever, and the patient feels great pain,
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that wounds are deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	"The other limbs such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary limbs, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and similar limbs are safe according to various conditions."
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	"When a sigh is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous (as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do likewise),"
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened at home to someone that an arrow fell or was shot in the root of the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it and drew it out from beneath the ear's fat without any injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And at another game, an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye beneath the paper wadding, and the arrow was stuck fast; only its point could be reached facing the timber, and it was as large as a Turkish bow, all in light iron without ears;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The operation was successful, and no bad accident occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian; it was an Arab arrow with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I cut the barbs and carefully drew out the arrow, and the Christian was saved.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And drew an arrow from someone at home that had fallen into the belly, believing him to be dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	And then after thirty days had passed, it did not change its position;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the boil, drew it out, and burned it with fire, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a boil fall on someone's back, and the wound is healed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the boil remained inside, and did not change its natural position or cause harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man on whom a boil fell on his face and the wound was healed;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and it remained thus without causing great pain.
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And I drew out a boil from the prince's son, which had fallen into his throat and was slightly inclined towards the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the boil was completely covered over.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat it after it had fallen three days earlier.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I cut into it with a very fine needle and did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was the tip of the arrow I placed on the wound plastered with digestive attractant, for that reason the wound did not swell up.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And then the tip of the arrow appeared
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the plaster again the next day, and the wound healed again, and the patient remained like that for a long time until he felt the arrowhead inside his nose.
et il le me dist.	And he told me this
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied corrosive hot medicine to the wound for many days until it opened, and I tested it and felt that the tip of the arrow was protruding from its place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I pushed into the opening of the wound with this hot medicine until the head of the arrow became visibly apparent
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it took nearly four months for this to pass, and then the wound opened up so that I could insert pliers into it, but I moved them from side to side and could not pull out anything.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Then I did not cease to devise and plan ways of instruments, until on the third day I found well-made forceps according to its final form described in this chapter, with which I grasped and closed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then closed it, and the wound was healed, and the patient became entirely healthy.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	But I have told you about the extraction of certain arrows, so that you may place your treatment on what I did not mention, for books cannot cover everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But wise masters compare even small things, and find new works and new instruments according to the needs of the case at hand in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows come out of the limbs where they are stuck in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either through the wound where they entered, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which jumps out where it enters is an arrow entering flesh, and sometimes it happens suddenly.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump out, leave it until the flesh can be pushed around, and let the wound heal.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it there for some days, and move it each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then if it comes out, and if it does not come out, carefully pierce around it with a fine probe until the area around it is widened, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone at its head and goes as far as one of the brain's ventricles, some accidents that I mentioned may occur to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	So do not pull it out, but leave it alone for some days until it becomes even again, because if the arrow has reached the brainstem, death will result.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not reach too deep, and the patient remains for a few days without bad symptoms, then attempt to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very deeply embedded and cannot be pulled out, then administer poultices around it as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the wound until it's clean.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrowhead is buried in the flesh so that one cannot see it, then search for it carefully.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, pull it out with some tool.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein involved, then cut until the wound is large enough.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	And pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that keep it in place, cut away the flesh that is stuck on both sides of the wound so that you can then break off or bend the barbs to extract the arrow.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And be careful not to break the arrow, lest it cause greater injury when extracting it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then wait until the place around is properly prepared, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if bleeding is profuse and hinders you, then apply what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	And guard yourself from incising nerves and veins; devise how you might carefully remove the arrow without danger, either swiftly or slowly, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And place the patient according to how he was when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help. If you cannot do so, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, where something of it is visible or the skin is swollen there, can be felt around
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Then cut down until you can grasp it with forceps, and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	If it is now stuck.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be pulled out, leave it for now and resume the extraction later until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	If the shaft of the arrow is there, push it all the way in.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	And if the shaft falls out and you see that there is no exit point, then administer a cauterizing instrument so that the tip of the arrow enters its hollow.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And then apply fire, and if the arrowhead is stuck, insert an instrument with a pointed entrance end to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrowhead has entered, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if possible, then treat the wound as it ought.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrowhead falls in the thigh or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is nearby, you can grasp it with forceps.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And beware not to grasp the vein or nerve, then extract it and sew up the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	until healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat bones is similar to a bird's beak, and here is an illustration of that shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	There are many ways to do this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	Large, medium, and small ones, according to the size of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like the feathers of a bird, for driving into the point of the arrow, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	Here is the shape of forceps for grasping and pulling:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are 31 veins from which we bleed, among them 16 are in the head:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two temporal arteries behind the ears called "doubles 'herbechi'.
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	And two arteries visible in both temples;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And two veins in the inner canthus of each eye called "aspirantes";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	The vein that runs across the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	And the vein which is at the head of the nose
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	And the two arteries that are in the neck
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	And the two veins which are above the mouth's lips, and these are called 'augeherich'.
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The five main veins in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the Cephalic vein, running along the right side of the chest, which common people call the 'vein of the head'.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	And the second is called 'fast', and is composed of the Cephalic and Basilic veins, which common people call the 'vein of the heart'.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And the Basilic vein runs along the left side of the chest; common people call it 'the vein of the belly', and it lies above the forearm's muscle and is visible on the palm.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the Salvatellite vein is the vein that runs between the little finger and ring finger, having two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	And in the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	The first is below the curve of the pouch on the left side, and the second starts which is at the ankle on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the vein called 'nesse', which is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The discharge from veins that are behind the ears helps with old ulcers and headaches;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the characteristics of the discharge are, as I tell you, to raise the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then have the patient turn their neck towards one side with a wry neck, until two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head;
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Then seize them with your thumb and index finger where you feel the pulse beneath your fingers.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet and insert it beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein upstream, and cut both skin and vein deeply with two strokes, until you see blood flowing;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then hold it still and bind it until it heals.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples is beneficial for migraine, catarrh, and habitual ophthalmia, and for the flow of tears from the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the qualities of the healer are as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	And it is that the patient holds his neck steady so that the two veins appear clearly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And you feel the pulse beneath your thumb, and then compress gently.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then raise the heart above the vein with your middle finger and place the lancet below it, lift the vein upwards and cut it, as you have done with the other two veins, and let blood flow according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then unbind the patient, place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And then bind it tightly and leave it until it heals.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have spoken of their dislocation and extraction, where this book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding of the frontal vein is as valuable as the bleeding of the temporal vein for treating old facial diseases, and for migraine and redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting it until the veins appear;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called 'fosseur', of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein and press with your hand or something else until you see as much blood come out as you wish;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein so it stops bleeding, often with a wide bandage.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, do not let the bandages be too tight;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	And tie it diagonally, because the bone is nearby and by chance the bandage may break if it is too thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The bleeding of the two veins that are in both eyelids helps with the eyes, and with redness, itching, inflammation of the eye, and diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the nature of their injury is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting it to one side, as mentioned before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the wound appears, and it should be a cross-shaped cut, about two fingers long and wide, because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are thin, they may break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then wipe off the blood until you have enough, and then tie with cotton, tying it securely.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	This wound from the vein near the nose is beneficial for fever, and madness with frenzy, and facial diseases such as migraines and redness that appears on the face, especially when it's chronic;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the nature of this wound is that the patient strains their neck, then holds their nose with your left hand, and takes the thin flame and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and blood will now begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not go too deep, make it flow with blood according to your need, then let it rest one night, for it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the form of fire:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The urine of two goats helps with constipation, and aids in mixing medicines, and is beneficial for many diseases, including epilepsy, erysipelas, corrosion, herpes, and skin diseases.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the properties of urine are such that the patient draws his neck under both [feet].
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	And let the master be standing at the head of the patient, and the patient sitting on a chair; then open a vein on the arm a little wide, then let blood temperately, as much as is necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	Then do the same on the other vein; then untie the bandage, and press around both veins moderately so that the patient does not faint.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And leave it until morning, when the wound will be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the healing of bodies
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	"The juice of the veins of the lips above aids in coldness in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of the lips, and nose and around."
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of treatment are to make the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the lip and look at two veins, one on the right lip and one on the left, which are known to be black, and have small black veins around them:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Therefore cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the largest one on each side, and do likewise for the two veins that are above and below them, for they are of the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the healing underneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The treatment of the veins beneath the tongue helps after treating the cephalic vein, for it is used in strangulation of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the qualities of the treatment are that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, lifts their tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Therefore heal both [the dislocations] one after the other, but do not press too hard inward, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the elbow that are commonly treated are healed in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Either by pressing with a broad flame, or with a fine olive oil drop like a cutting edge, which is called 'anesil';
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they are wide and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	"The shape of the mirror blow is very well known, and is wide as you see:"
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary for opening the hairy veins that are full of visible thick blood, and contain thick and turbid blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And this is the form of the olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	"And it is more pointed and fine, and is for letting the veins that have thin, lemon-colored blood."
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The cautery of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps those with illnesses in the throat, neck, chest, and belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the cauterizer to cauterize skillfully, and to beware of the artery that lies beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow abundantly, then it must be stanched, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame should not be pointed but cutting like a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the boil does not open visibly, then you must draw it out and replace it with another one
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or any vein from it, or you can also insert the vein into its place in the arm
elle apert manifestement;	it opens visibly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	Cut at the flame like a knife, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know the place of the vein, then before extracting it, touch that place until you feel the pulse
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place with ink and tie the arm, then cut the vein with the flame like a knife
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	but be careful not to injure the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is of the artery.
eschui la donques.	Avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see something sticking out like a child's urine, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is arterial blood:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Therefore, quickly place your finger firmly on top, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, for this happens many times:
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Then bind the arm and leave it like that; do not move it.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful, do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	But if the bleeding does not stop and you faint, and a physician is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, for its mouth draws back.
et estainche li sans.	And stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a fig bark, split it open, and take one half and bind it firmly until the next day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	If the bleeding stops, that is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	But if not, then treat it with powders that stop bleeding, as we have said;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the stopping of the bleeding is not harmful in many cases due to the small area of the wound and the power of binding the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein's blood vessel in the middle helps because it brings blood from above the head and below the body; for this reason, it is composed of both the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	The surgeon must beware of the nerve that lies beneath; if it is pierced too deeply and the nerve is struck, it will swell and cause injury to the veins, perhaps rendering healing impossible.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	This nerve is often exposed; however, if it is not exposed in some men due to its fineness, then you must heal it with the aid of an instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	Avoid damaging the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	"And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it lengthwise;"
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The vein from the head also aids in bringing blood from the head and helps with the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	It is necessary to cauterize with the olive-shaped flame or the myrtle-shaped flame, for this is the safest of all veins because there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Still, it is necessary to seek out the lightest position, and do not distress if the first attempt fails; begin again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and perhaps the place swells for some men when they fail at the first attempt, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	"The quality of letting depends on your judgment."
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about healing is that health is maintained only to preserve health and to avoid future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are on the elbow:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	namely, the cephalic, basilic, and median cubital vein;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed at the beginning of Lent, in autumn, and winter after meals, when signs ofpletion appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	One should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours into the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding administered for illnesses has no fixed time, but it should be done when needed, at any hour and at all times;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not necessary to circumcise children until they are fourteen years old, nor women during pregnancy except after four months have passed.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the elderly over 60 years of age receive this medicine.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wishes to be circumcised, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful impurities from the intestines into the main members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor should one circumcise someone who is too full of food, or drunk at that moment, nor someone suffering from dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And one should not circumcise after an attack of the colic, vomiting, diarrhea, menstruation in women, hard labor, staying awake all night, fasting, or anything that weakens the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then thin out the humors if there is copious blood, through foods and drinks and medications, if you have the power to do so.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then enter into the bath, if nothing hinders it, to subtilize the blood, and heal the vein of the leg around the third, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And guard on that day against labor, and overeating, and lust, and similar things
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And be lying and joyful, and let the healthier person's arm be higher than the one being bled, and rub the arm twice or thrice, then tie the bandage in the middle, for if it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	Then rub the place with his hands until you feel the veins swell and can see them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Then let the bledder wet the blade of a little old oil, then place his left thumb on that vein below where he wishes to cut, so that the vein does not slip or break when struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that slip away like strings when bled, and some are so full of windiness that when the blade is placed upon them, it retreats with the blade, and cannot open the vein, such are they.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to be skilled in such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens at first, that's good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, then try again a little lower or higher quickly, if the place is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the place is swollen and the patient is afraid, let him rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	Perhaps abscesses will form;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter a bath, then resume the cauterization if it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the hole is small, or blood flows thinly and you doubt that not much blood will come out, then apply fire directly to that hole;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And open it quickly before the place becomes swollen;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	For this happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the wound swollen, then do not recommence the cauterization, and place a little bit of oil ointment on it, for it lightens the body's blood, and in this case, the ointment that the oil brings is beneficial.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the ointment of oil in each cauterization that you perform on veins, to staunch the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	This same thing is done by thrice and bowels of urine when placed upon the wound.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If blood is too thick and does not spread out evenly.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if a large abscess appears, which happens often, especially when there is no cauterization except for that one time when the vein opening is small, then you hurry and place on the wound a sponge moistened in water and heated slightly, and hold it there for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And you must do this after the bleeding stops from the vein opening, and if it remains on the wound for several days any blackness or greenness will not harm it.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see, put on some aloë or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mastich, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times an abscess and swelling occur at the sinew of the basilisk:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Therefore place your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft under hand pressure, then that is a bad swelling.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Hence do not apply anything of what we have mentioned, for it may cause the artery to break:
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	But make a dry plaster to harden the spot, then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw off the blood according to each person's constitution and the color of their blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red:
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	And if you see it large, let it be until it is diminished;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for one who is full and bloated, and needs bloodletting, make the incision larger, and let the flame be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And to one who is weak, do the opposite; he must be warmed often with warm poultices, and they should be applied by cutting, not pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of warming prevents bleeding and damage to nerves, and it is better than warm poultices that are long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for one whose body fails with warmth, give him pounded bread in juice of pomegranates;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if he is overheated, then bleed him three or four times; And if he has a cold constitution, let him eat before the warming bread pounded in thick syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if they faint during bloodletting, after losing much blood, then they must inhale broth of meat, and fragrant subtle syrup, and use the other things that we have spoken of in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to evacuate one arm and have bloodletting done again afterward, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he be bled a little at a time according to his continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to evacuate one arm after the first bloodletting and has a strong body should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to have bloodletting done on another part of the body should be bled on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood inside the body that is already heated, which causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	So one must draw off a large quantity and widen the opening as much as possible without causing pain;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	After you have prepared all the necessary conditions for healing, and you place your hand on the swollen area when it is hot, ensure that death does not take the place of improvement, which happens many times if the healer is careless.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not necessary for you to see blood flow out a second time and close the hole by pressing strongly upon it when you untie the arm.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	Nor if it is crooked, should he hastily extend his arm, for that would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	But let him remain until the swelling comes down a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	And where you apply the tip of the flame, keep it there until the blood that has frozen at the mouth of the vein flows out; then place some thread moistened in water and press lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	"But if the vein is swollen, do not let go nor squeeze too hard until the inflammation has subsided."
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	"And if it becomes necessary to draw blood a second time, do so either in the same vein or in another one, or even in the other arm."
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	"The vein in the arm is opened in place of the vein in the head because it is more accessible."
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of healing is for the patient to immerse their hand in warm water until the bones feel hot;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then tie it gently so that the vein appears well; then treat the swelling from the side, not from the length or width;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the wound be wide, and let it be cut close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot flow out, then place the hand in warm water, and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is inflamed, then do not place the hand in warm water, for one puts it there more often in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the cut of this vein is safer than all other veins, as neither artery nor nerve runs through it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The incision for saving the hand on the right side has value for all diseases of the liver, and this is how:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Hold the hand, and place it in warm water until the vein becomes swollen and visible.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if you cut across the vein, and remove all of it completely, then nothing will be harmed;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	But do not cut too deep, for nerves lie beneath all flesh; then place the hand in warm water if blood is congealed in the wound and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	"And when you have drawn enough blood, apply oil and a little salt to quickly cauterize the wound, and do this for each cut."
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	"The bleeding of the vein in the left hand is beneficial for those suffering from mumps, and it should be done in the same way as I have described for the right hand."
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The juice of the soapwort is beneficial for all illnesses below the body, such as those of the womb, retention of fluids, and diseases of the spine, thighs, and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of his health is such that the patient places their foot in warm water and rubs along the vein until it disappears, then ties above the ankle joint.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And the vein is at the ankle, and there are many sinews going up from the foot above it;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Therefore cauterize where the largest sinew or tendon is located, or at the ankle.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you cauterize above the foot, beware of the nerves that are below it and cut across like cutting meat;
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flame be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	"And if blood cannot flow out, immerse the foot in water again and allow the vein to empty completely."
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	If the cauterization fails the first time, then repeat it slightly higher the second time because the place is burned;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and do likewise to the sore on the other foot.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	"The location of the sciatic vein is on the outside ankle, and bleeding it is beneficial for lower back pain when caused by hot blood."
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his cauterization is such that the patient enters into a bath and holds four fingers above the ankle while twisting, otherwise the vein will not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	And if it opens, then drain all of it in every way you can, including across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is better that you cut it out, for the place is dry and it responds much to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, drain any vein of hers that opens towards the back of the foot and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and draw out as much blood as you see, then untie the bandage, and put cotton on it and bind it tightly;
ele est maintenant sanee.	it is now drained.
des sainies de ventouse	And regarding the applications of cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cups are made from horns, or earthenware, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And cupping is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping that is done without striking is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either with all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	And cupping done by striking and bloodletting is performed at fourteen locations on the body, one of which is directly on top of the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	And the other is within the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	And the other is on either side of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction cup below the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction cup beneath each shoulder;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction cup above the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and suction cups on either arm;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	And suction cups on both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	And suction cups on both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	Suction does not draw blood, except for small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken at all, unlike venesection;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be applied in any disease caused bypletion, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if it is necessary to apply suction cups due to illness or habit, we will do so every hour at the beginning or end of the month, and at all times.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they need to apply suction cups, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And those who findpletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness before the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have an swollen tongue, and vomit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And there are also those who dream, and see by nut's blood, and wounded, dead, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	"And when we see these signs, especially during the month, we will order them to be leeched three hours after noon."
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The sweat of the muses helps against headache ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this happen after evacuation of all blood;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this ventosation is in place of the sweat of the head, and those who are cold by nature or have catarrh should not use it, for it harms them greatly;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And therefore old men should not use it, nor those with cold diseases in the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	"And those who often bleed themselves become forgetful. Therefore, the leech should be placed a little lower to avoid forgetfulness."
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	And ventosation on the neck is instead of sweat from the head and basilisk, and it helps with constriction of the chest, and breaking of the channel of the lung, and coughing, and repletion;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And then a little pressure is needed, for if it holds too firmly, it can cause harm to the stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The winds of the second rib on the neck are useful for headaches and inflammation of the eyes, migraine, strangling, pain in the roots of the teeth.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And you must instruct the surgeon that he expresses his hand during setting so that he does not cut the artery and cause blood flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The winds under the chin are useful for mouth diseases, gum decay, and similar mouth ailments.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	And it is in place of the treatments for the second lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	"The shoulder windings are good for diseases that come from heat and swelling."
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The winds on the sides are as useful as the three veins of the arm, for they attract blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the surgeon not to go too deep with the cautery, for the place is bare of flesh and lies beneath nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass that is placed on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for illnesses below, and it is necessary that the cupping glass be large, and made of brass, so that it can draw well.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And perhaps if it were too thin, it would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and it makes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The cupping glasses on the legs are applied openly because they draw blood from the whole body and are useful for old pains in the loins, sciatica, and the bladder; and they reduce swellings.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	And they are placed on the two hips and the two ankles, but nevertheless they weaken the body after prolonged use and cause coughing in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The manner of applying the cupping glass is to place it first empty and suck gently, then quickly place it and move it evenly, without stopping until you see the area redden and swell, and the redness of blood appears.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then burn, and reset the cupping glasses, and beware of the condition of the body, for there are many who have tender flesh, and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	If it is necessary to strike only once, and one must make wide, somewhat deep wounds;
et suce legierement.	And suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the blood is thick, then strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very dense, then strike a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we wish to draw out only a little blood at a time, one strike suffices.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we wish much blood, then strike frequently;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the blood is thick, strike deep, and make the incisions so that the heart is pierced suddenly; this is necessary for those who have thick skin and hard flesh, and narrow pores, you should oil the cups' openings with aperient and dissolvent oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is inflamed, with oil of violets, or sweet almond oil, or seed oil of melons;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is in the ear, with oil of watercress, or lilies, or chamomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excessiveness is thick and cold, use almond oil or balm oil or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if it is for one who has tender flesh and wide pores, then no oil should be put on, but it should be washed afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of morelle, or water of cucurbit, or water of porcellain, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture should rise using this method: with myrtle water or sumac water and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive sweating should rise from old wine, or water of buckthorn, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And one should not use cupping glasses before the bath nor during it, but after the bath one or two hours.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And do not sleep after cupping; one must warm oneself when being cupped and when finished with cupping.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware if the person being treated is choleric, and if their blood is too thick and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	Then they should take cold things, such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce with garlic, and similar foods.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And minced pigeons, and castrated goat meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with cold constitution should take syrup of honey and mid-level perfumed wine that is between old and new, and minced apples, minced pigeons and small birds.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day when he expects to vomit, he should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary to give some men sometimes three times or musk before vomiting, or afterwards, to strengthen the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	Let the blood be subtly taken, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cups that are placed without striking are those placed on the liver, and on the side, and on podagry, and on the stomach, cheek, back and thigh; for these members do not suffer to be struck upon, and they only do it to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on the breasts when there is an inflamed breast.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	To remove the dampness from the limb, as we place cupping glasses on the stomach and head to reduce it.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and relieves pain when there is congestion or stone, so it may by its attractive power perhaps remove the congestion, or dislodge the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	And similarly it does when placed upon the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy, in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And let there be two of them with a width of half a palm and depth of one, having on the side around the middle a small hole like that for putting in a needle, made of brass, so that it does not cut the patient when placed on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And he should have in the middle a rod of iron or bronze for placing an enclosed candle upon it, and they are large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the cups used on children differ from those used on adults, and for thin people differ from those used on fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should thus place this cup upon the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Light the candle wick or the linen and place it in the cup through the rod that is inside the cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cup so as not to burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it upon the limb, and ensure that the hole we spoke of is positioned upwards so that when one wants to, steam can escape and the cup can be removed;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And again light the linen wick as before, and repeat this process often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	Thus the cup used in cases of pleurisy with acute fever has no rod or hole and is only heated when it is full of water; it is placed upon the limb alone;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the formula:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Leeches are not applied except in limbs where you cannot apply cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in fleshless places, like the toes or nose, and other similar ones;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And the qualities of using them are that when you find leeches in clear, sweet waters without any defect, then take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place them in fresh water until they are hungry and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	then let the vein and the cupping glass be sanctified, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the leeches on it.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are full and fall off, if it's a place where you can apply a cupping glass, then do so, for this is very beneficial afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then raise the limb gently and then with water, very carefully, and then squeeze it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the wound is too close to the body of the patient, then soak the linen bandage in cold water and place it on top until the blood thins out.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the blood is multiplied, then apply powdered vitriol or saltpetre and similar substances until it thins out.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or you may place half a handful of peeled peas on the wound, leaving them there until they absorb at the site; this will now stop the bleeding.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if more are needed, take others from the patient.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the wounds will not close, then rub fresh blood on the wound and insert a needle until it bleeds; then apply the linen bandage, and as soon as it feels the blood, it will absorb.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are full, then powder a little aloe and celandine or ash on them; they will now congeal.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	"Here begins the book of fractures"
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	"This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the treatment of fractures and dislocations."
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that foolish physicians ignore this chapter, for they have never seen any of the ancient books nor read a letter from them.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason, the science is extracted from our land, as I found none of it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	I know nothing of it, except through the science of ancient books which I have studied so much that I have practiced this science, and through experience, and through habit in my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	And I have described for you in this chapter what is contained within it, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are arranged, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	"It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the contents of the words and chapters where wise men place their understanding and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when any breaking or dislocation or twisting or crushing occurs to someone, you must quickly examine the patient on both sides, unless there is something preventing it entirely, such as weakness of body, or a child, or an old person.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the weather is not very warm, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and avoid eating cold foods, such as cold meats, and the flesh of birds and hares, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not overeat on foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are uncertain about a hot abscess or an expansion of matter in the limb.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient returns to his first government that he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with foods that cause good growth and are moistening, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pears, apples, cow's milk, eggs, fresh fish, and similar things."
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	"For with this nourishment muscles grow back more quickly and the fracture heals faster;"
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of the old and infirm cannot be well reset or mended according to their nature due to weakness of the limbs, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of young children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	But if there is no remedy, bind the broken bone with strong bandages that will hold and join the limb together until it heals as before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And do not expose all the points of his work, and therefore he must be fed on hearty foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	"And know that fractures are diverse in many ways."
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	"For the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures."
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	"There are fractures that occur suddenly, like falling from a horse, and others that occur gradually, like the splitting of a feather for writing."
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	"And there are fractures with wounds, and fractures with only a small crack."
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each manner has its own device and proper instrument in restoration, according to what the memory recalls in its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is known that the bone is broken when the joint is twisted and opens wide upon being pressed with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twist nor sound upon touching it, and the patient feels little pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But he can also have torsion, or splitting, or slight fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	"So do not move him by hand, but apply the medicines that come later and then gently immobilize him."
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fractures which go inwards and have two parts separated must be aligned evenly before an abscess forms there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess does form there, let it remain some days until the abscess is subdued;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	Then set it evenly at the movement you can do lightly and bloodlessly, for know that the restoration of this one is easier than those with fragments.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then bind it as is necessary hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone has broken into pieces, then extend it with two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or use your hand for small limbs, or use two bands, or one band and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And align the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are dislocated, you reset them with all your strength, putting the fragments back in their places gently, and ensure that through your work the patient suffers no injury or pain.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And join together closely the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel carefully with your hand whether it seems well joined or not:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If you reset it beautifully, and do not pull too hard or press as those who cause heat and constriction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And once the limb is set, instruct the patient not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning or in any other manner;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And make sure that the limb is secured so that the patient feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For if it causes any pain, then it has not been set properly, and you must place it in such a position that there is no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And ensure that it is set correctly, so that there are no twists when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	The condition of the broken limb will be according to what I tell you
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	"Know that fractured limbs are diverse in size, length and shape."
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	It is necessary to wrap soft and fine linen cloths around (it).
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	And those that are thick, like thigh and calf:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	It is necessary to wrap it in a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandage encircles the entire limb evenly and holds it tightly without any gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then wrap it with light bandages, three or four times according to the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on all the bandages. Then go up above the fracture and tighten less so that the fracture can separate a little from the fracture.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And loosen the bandage bit by bit until you grasp a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it around again on the fractured area.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part below the fracture and tighten it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first binding above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the ligaments wads of linen or cloth until it is entirely even; then bind everything above with gauze, and then place well-made compresses on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place on top something that cools the hot abscess and reduces swelling; leave it like this for a few days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then press down on your compresses with something half the width of a wide reed or a piece of wood used for hoes or palm ribs, shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But the compress placed on the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And let it also be as long as necessary for the limb's size or length.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then press down on the compresses just as you did in the first layer; then tie it securely with string, just as you did in the first layer over the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	Narrower above, always less
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	And the threads should be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of some fools who make their bindings from twisted linen cords, which is a great error; for the binding cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two fingers' breadth between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	"And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after the bandaging on healthy areas, place linen bandages or wool wadding underneath them so that it does not bruise."
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	"When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the skin is broken, I will speak about its treatment later on."
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	"And know that one should not bind all broken limbs with splints on the first day."
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it does not need to have stitches put in until after five or seven days, or more according to your certainty of a hot swelling appearing.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And here is the manner of ancient poultices for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And it is that you take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill and mix it with plenty of eggs; and this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, use it for a poultice to restore fractures in many ways, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method for applying plasters that restore breaks, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take acacia leaves, dill, wild celery, opobalsamum, gum arabic, and mastic; mix them together.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Add myrrh and aloewood; mix them together.
alechil VIIII З.;	Grind aloe vera roots into a fine powder (7 parts).
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	And grind it into a fine powder, mixing it with beaten egg yolk.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the patient's complexion is hot, this plaster should be used as it has good properties and quickly heals broken bones. It benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method for applying a plaster that treats sprains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take mastic and balsam of Peru; mix them together (10 parts).
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Add myrrh and aloewood; mix them together (9 parts).
acaice VI З.;	Acaia six (6) parts.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Bole armoniac ten (10) parts, grind well, and knead with honey or beaten egg yolk; apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to treat dislocations and bones out of their places, alleviates pain occurring, and reduces swelling and breaking:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new linen, moisten it with hot water and oil cooked together, then place on the location.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for alleviating heat from an abscess, and removes pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to treat that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and common mallow leaves, grind them together and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner to plaster for the healing of bone fracture and to soften the remainder of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take equal parts of marsh mallows, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and wheat flour;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Grind the mixture together and cook it with wine. If the limb is inflamed, cook it with moistened coriander water or water, and apply it as a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another manner to plaster stronger than the first one, when a hard abscess forms on the healing member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take equal parts of marsh mallow root, flaxseed, balm, meadowsweet, savin, violet flowers, and chamomile flowers;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	And grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	"Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more. He says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard."
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	"And it seems to Galen that one should put dry and slightly warm things on a broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense, and similar substances, as we have said."
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Other plaster method that is good for injury and pain
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugwort and chopped comfrey leaves, or chicken feathers, and figs, and equal parts salt, grind them, and make a plaster with the mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then remove it after a little while, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	If not, leave it on for many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry up and remove it, and take off the plaster immediately.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And take a light cloth, and damp sea sponge, dip it in water, and apply it to the place until the itching stops, and the pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry wool wadding moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it on with a bandage until you are sure of having a hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and may the pain be removed, then begin again the subtle massage, with a little plaster, but do not pull too hard as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen are all gone, and you need plaster and bandages again, then resume it, just as you did at first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	If there is no improvement in the limb from what we have said, then do not remove the plaster until three or four or five or seven days have passed;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And sometimes leave it on for 20 days, according to what is seen, until the fracture becomes apparent and the flesh approaches.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	Then tighten more than before, and let his flesh grow thick, as I said earlier;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see the wound drying out too much, know that there can be no healing from it;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Therefore apply warm water compresses each time you remove the plaster, every third day, and relax a little with massage;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Thus through this treatment, healing comes quickly to the limb, and correct immediately those foolish doctors who reset limbs incorrectly:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is harmful, and it involves fearful operations, and I see nothing else but doubt and performing it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various types of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many kinds of fractures, with diverse appearances, and their causes are distinguished;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are fractures caused by blows from swords that break the collarbone all the way down to its attachment beneath the bone, like an axe or a tree trunk;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And thus this kind of fracture is called "hachet" (axed).
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or when the sword cuts across the bone without piercing it, this type of fracture is called 'absolute'
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And both these two types of fractures result in large or small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussion that embeds, splits, or crushes from a fall onto stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture that approaches the bone tissue beneath the bone or is above it, and this wound can be large or small
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	Also there is a fracture where the wound is thin and subtle like a hair, with a small crack; this type of fracture is called 'capillary'.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound is made by being struck with a stone or by falling, or by something similar, causing a fragment of bone to enter inwards, and the site becomes elevated like the bottom of a cauldron;
si entre li piere dedens.	If between the stones within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their head, such as children's heads;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and occurs with all kinds of fractures where small pieces are dislocated like stars;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	And I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all types of fractures by the displacement on them, by careful inspection, and by the corrupted flesh that is above them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary fracture is recognized because when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating a fracture, pay attention to any accidents of illness, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, extension, pallor, fever with chills, inflammation of the eyes, etc., in many conditions, he cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming accident and hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounded person first comes to you, especially in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone does not become corrupted and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must cut open the broken part as follows:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And take the patient's head gently and uncover the bone in all possible ways, carefully exposing the wound's appearance; if blood or pus flows while uncovering the bone, clean it with what is necessary, and fill the place with bandages moistened in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	And let the wound rest until the pus is calmed, and ensure that there is no more bleeding;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then begin to remove around the bone, which is done in two ways:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One manner is thus: You shall cut narrowly before at the tip of the head; this is the shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	"And then I add another cut, greater than the first one."
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And another manner is thus: You should have many diverse cuts, some narrow and others wide, pointed, and made of steel.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and perform them lightly so that you do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and sturdy, then you must first bore around it before administering cuts with tartaric mixture, not too deep that they pierce through the soft bone, and the point should have a margin or circle above it to prevent the point from passing beyond the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you must have many such points so that each fits properly on the edge of the bone, so that you may have tartaric mixture for all wounds.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three ways of applying tartaric mixture:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The qualities for boring around a broken bone are that you place the tartaric mixture on the bone and turn with both hands until you know the bone is bored.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then reposition the cautery elsewhere a little later, and do so all around. Then cut with incising tools the space of bone that is between the pores, and do this more finely than you can, and gently, as we have said, until you pull out the bone by hand, or with any of the instruments you have such as forceps.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and ensure that you do not touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and pulled out the bone, then you must reset the remainder of the bone with another tool resembling an incising tool, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other incising tools;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if any small bones or scales remain, remove them gently with the instruments.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then heal the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another way of working is that which Galien describes, which is safer;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And strike it very strongly, this is his saying.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	"It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone where the fracture appears more openly, so that when you have exposed this part, then place beneath the head of this lenticular knife, of which here is the form:"
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut on one side alone, and if the part is acute on both sides, then the cutting will be towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then strike gently with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and beware of the tissue beneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, scrape it gently, for one can scrape well without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	"And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the dura mater, and the bone is only cut on top with small pieces, then it is necessary to remove this prominence and remove the scales with a fine razor that you should have in various quantities, so as to accommodate each place according to the operation and shape of the fracture."
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	"So remove first with large razors, and then with more delicate ones, and do not stop doing this until it is completely done."
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	For each of the other haircuts and subtle breaks, you must direct the cause according to its alignment;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is something that cannot be answered by one who has not studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is open, you must take one linen cloth according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another cloth doubled over two or three times, wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And do this more gently than you can, so as not to strain the sinews, then apply one bandage above and another below, but do not draw it too tightly that it only touches the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	And leave it thus for one or two days until the boil is softened, then untie it and apply medications such as iris roots, almond flour, incense powder, and aristologia, and similar substances;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And grind these substances into a powder, sprinkle it on the wound, and apply healing ointments without causing pain.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	And ensure that the wound is always clean, so that no ointment remains on it nor does any bowels gather there, for when bowels gather on the brain cloth they will rot and cause great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	For when something irritating is placed on the sinews, it causes them to wither.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	"Therefore be careful, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt."
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness comes upon it due to the medication applied, which has this virtue, then you should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix them together in a cloth, and apply it to the sinews;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, after explaining ways of treatments, make sure he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or just one by itself, for they are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And the one below is made of cartilage and does not break, unless it gets hit hard or twisted, but then it will heal.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should place your little finger in the hole of the nose and align this break with your index finger on the outside, until the nose regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	"And if the break is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you must insert a small rod with a rounded end into it."
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if both parts are broken, then do likewise, and try to restore it on the first day if possible;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	Otherwise, after seven or ten days, when the swelling has subsided, then apply bandages made of linen cloth to the top of the nose if it's broken on one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	When you bend one towards another side, if there is a fracture there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the bandages be so thick that they fill up the openings of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers said that one must grease the tents with butter, changing each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that this is correct, but it is necessary that they be moistened in a mixture of almond oil and powdered myrrh;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the bandage on until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	Sometimes feathers from a goose are used instead of bandages, and if the fracture stays in place, then the patient feels better.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Or faire le ciel que vous voyez
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	"And if inflammation appears in the nose while you are working on it, then insert there wax or cotton soaked in rose oil or a little bit of diacynthion."
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not form, then apply a plaster made from flour of sesame and powdered frankincense mixed with almond oil, followed by light dressings, without binding the nose.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the fracture of the nose is small and broken into many pieces, remove them with appropriate tools, then stitch the split and treat it with things that involve skin and wound-healing, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound inside it, then treat it with hot water compresses, placing lead plates until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	On the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured below and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only on one side, not completely broken into two pieces, it can be easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary that, if the fracture is on the right side, you place your two index fingers in the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is on the left jawbone, place your right hand's two index fingers in the mouth, gently push the fracture with them, and align it using your other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced by two fingers' width, you must apply traction forcefully until it is aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if there is movement or loosening of teeth, constrain them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then apply wax to the broken jawbone and cover it with a doubled cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place on the cloth a well-made splint or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, tying it at the point where you can. Instruct the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the figure has changed, untie it on the third day, then put back what was dislocated.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply a poultice made of flour ground with abundant eggs or sesame flour after removing the cauterization.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And place a light linen cloth over the poultice, and if the poultice dries out but the patient's condition does not improve, leave it until it is healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Often it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if swelling appears, apply what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is both fracture and wound together, make sure no fragment of bone has been removed.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	so that the fracture can be properly treated with appropriate tools.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, widen it with a cautery according to your needs.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these fragments, and none remain, then sew the wound if it is wide, and place one of the bandages suitable for this, to encourage flesh growth until it heals.
de la forcele	From the scalpel
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	A broken collarbone happens frequently near the shoulder, and fractures occur in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	either it is broken and dislocated at two places with fragments, which is the easiest to reset;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or there is fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is thus when there is no wound; you should have two assistants so that one can hold the dislocated limb steady.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Then align the fracture with your two hands so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round spear of cloth or wool, and it should be thick according to your necessity;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and extend and lift the limb, holding the spear with your hand so that you align the fracture as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the blade of the scalpel forward because it has gone in deep, then have the patient lie on their side with a pillow under their shoulder and place a small cushion underneath. Then have your assistant press down on the shoulder so that the bone of the blade is lifted up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then adjust the fracture with your two hands, and if you find it displaced, then you must cut.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and pull the fragments gently apart, and if the bone cannot join due to some obstruction, then cut with one of the incissors you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	But you shall place beneath the forceps this instrument, to guard against dislocation.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	And it should resemble a spoon, not pointed, and be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And it should have two heads, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, like the outline of the wound you made when you reduced the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are certain of hot swelling, then close the wound, and if the outline is small, or you doubt hot swelling, cover the wound with rags and towels according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if granulation tissue is not present, soak a piece of gauze in rose oil mixed with honey and vinegar, and apply it to the wound.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The reduction of bone without wounds or cuts is to place on the bone a plaster made of powdered millstone and egg white, then place light dressings on it, and place a splint under the ankle if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide bandage, about a palm's width, then place a double cloth over the dressings and plaster;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a fine iron rod three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And place the rod on the break, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the sound shoulder, and under the dislocated shoulder;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And tighten each part, and when you see that the sling holds the break in place, and you clearly see that the rod does not move on the broken bone, then wrap it every day, and when the ligatures relax, then secure it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	And make the patient lie on their back, and put a small pillow under the dislocated shoulder while they sleep to raise it up.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	So that the break is eased by the lightening of the shoulder, where you bind the arm to the neck, and do not untie it except in case of misfortune, for up to twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then restart the emplacement if you see it is necessary, and hold it firmly until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And it will be restored in 28 days at most, and sooner for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Treatment of shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It sometimes happens that the shoulder joint is broken or dislocated, and cannot be put back into place without touching it;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	If the dislocation appears according to the shape of the break, then reset it according to its natural form in every possible way;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then place on the joint powder of the millstone with abundant egg whites, light bandages, and a double cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then place a wide and thin strip of cloth over it, slightly larger than the shoulder; if there are any hairs underneath the cloth near the shoulder joint, pack those hairs with linen bandages so that the cloth lies evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then bind it firmly with a large bandage so that the strip of cloth does not move from its place; check the binding every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time it dislocates, hold it tightly, and place the bone evenly if it is out of its proper position; then let the patient lie on their side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is reset in twenty or twenty-five days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this period is completed, release it, but be sure, for bone does not move out of place easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a fragment of bone sticks out and is not beneath the heart, cut it off and apply the treatment for fracture of the collarbone as mentioned earlier to encourage granulation tissue formation.
de la brisure dou pis	Treatment of elbow fracture
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The limb may sometimes break in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks near the joint.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	When it is broken in the middle, it tilts downward, and the patient feels great pain and faintness, and quickly, and sometimes vomits blood, and the marrow appears through the broken bone.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the treatment is that the patient lies frequently on their back, and places a cushion between their shoulders, then presses their shoulders together, and brings the ribs of both sides close to each other with your hands, carefully aligning them in all ways possible so that the bone appears as it should.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then place compresses and bandages on the broken bone with salt or other light dust, wrap it in a cloth, and secure it to the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	And wind the bandage roundly to the back, and tighten it afterwards, and check each hour to see if it has loosened, and if it has, then tighten.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	And if it is necessary to untie it, due to corrosion or itching that arises at the location, or pain or an abscess, then hurry and untie it, clean the area, and apply remedies as needed.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the area, and tighten it until it is firm.
de la brisure des costes	de la brisure des costes
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that fractures of the ribs occur only in large places after the back and at the top within, and they bend only because they are slippery.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	And one feels it well upon investigation, as you should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you align the break evenly as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a splint, and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the rib fracture leans inward, the patient feels great pain and pressure, similar to pleurisy, as the bone pokes the lung.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if it is sharp-pointed, and always present, vomiting much blood, it is serious, and the ancients considered it important.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are some who say that one should give him foods that swell the belly, to push back the break from within.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, lest abscesses come if they were not there before.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they are there, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they said that one puts cupping glasses on the spot to suck strongly, and this is similar to reason.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is doubt whether the cupping glasses will draw out the excesses to the location due to weakness of disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	"And they said that one should cover the spot with moistened wool in hot oil, and then place tents between the ribs to make the belt equal, after which it should be treated with pleurisy treatment, flesh, and medicine."
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone pressing on the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the location of the broken rib, and place something underneath the instrument to protect the spleen.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must cut the bone, pull gently, and afterwards sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and dress it with poultices until it is clean.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if a boil that has been present comes, then put moistened cloths in rose oil on the location.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the location of this with what is suitable for an abscess, and keep it constantly warm on the side where it should be until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	"de la brisure dou col"
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes there is bone fracture in the neck, and rarely does it bend;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his hands are softened and swollen and numb, and he cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that many are mortal in several conditions, and if he moves them and feels it well when they are pressed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if properly treated.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if such thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take care if the feet are soft, and if there are accidents in the hands, and windiness and excretion happen involuntarily on the back.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when it has been supported on its belly, excretion happens without control
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he lies on his back and wants to saddle himself up, he cannot do so.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that they are deadly
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	"And if this accident does not happen to them, then the matter is lighter."
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that if there is a hot boil, apply rose oil or goose fat oil to it until it is soothed;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then put on one of the comforting and drying emplastes, and the glue of a louse, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And do not sleep on that part where they feel pain until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone dislocates, then you must cover on the chest.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and remove the bone, then bring together both lips of the wound, if it is large, with one stitch, then treat it with ointment, cleansing the flesh until it is healthy.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the bone head is broken, which is called 'the cow's head,' then place your left hand pouch and make it even with the other hand at your power, then set the splint and the pin, if you need them.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then bind it, and if there is a dislocated bone, then cut into it and remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Here is the translation for "de la brisure de l’os de la hainche":
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Sometimes it happens that the thighbone is broken, and if it does happen, there will be a little bit of reduction to the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and cut from long ago, and decline toward the parting, and it comes to the patient pain in that place, and piercing, and swells what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the reduction is to stretch your hand upwards until you are above the dislocation;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and know where the dislocation is and its shape;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the dislocation is only at the head, then align this dislocation until it is in its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or declines inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that the restoration of this break can be seen more easily.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And once you've aligned it, place your elbow on the emplacement, then place a wooden or bone splint over it, and hold the dislocation steady so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and press down on the spot below the ribs until the joint is aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on their sound side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if a hot abscess appears, do not touch it until the hot abscess has subsided, and then apply what we have said before;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	then return to the reduction, and hold it in place as needed, if there is no bad outcome;
et c’est li maniere.	And this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Regarding the break of the shoulder blade
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder joint is that which is between the upper arm and the head of the shoulder blade, and if it is dislocated, it should be reduced according to one of these two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	From which one is that you take a branch full of large muskroot, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie two branches with two cords, hang them up high, and have the patient sit upon the seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then let him throw his broken arm upon the branch until it reaches the elbow and is held in place by a fork of wood, then weigh it down with some heavy object or have the assistant pull it downwards;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then the physician should set the break even with his own hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is to place the patient on their backrest and have them put their hand on their neck, then command two assistants to each take one end of the break with their hands—the first one taking the top part and the second one taking the bottom—and extend each one towards its side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then hold down the lien below the break and above it, extending each of the assistants to their respective sides.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, then you must place one cord in the middle under the elbow and the other towards the side, under the break.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And likewise if the break is towards the side, one must place the cord gently, without effort, so that the break is even in its place and on the side;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then set the fracture evenly as it ought to be, and bind it if no heat comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if heat does come, do not bind it for seven days, and apply a warm, moist cloth with rose oil until the swelling is reduced.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then bind it, and the way to bind it is thus: place the splint on the fracture, then bring the arm close to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And wrap it, binding tightly to the shoulder and arm so that the arm is in its proper place if nothing prevents it or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone has moved, use splints, and place a wider and stronger one on the fracture with two spaces between each splint, and make each splint large enough to extend three finger-widths beyond the fracture on either side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then press upon the elbow joints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, stronger but not pulling apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the socket of the elbow joints, and their tightening, as we have said, when you reset the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it lie for seven days, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then check every three days during the bandage, that no itching or swelling comes to the place where the limb cannot receive nourishment because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, then do not remove the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and place beneath the shoulder blade one cushion full of even wool, and watch every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move or that the bandages do not soften;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If the patient is treated by medical means, and given the food that we have mentioned above, then the food should be made very subtle at first.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when he begins to recover, then it should be made coarse.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	It is customary that the arm and leg should be reset after 40 days in total;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	then one must untie it, apply baths and ointment medicines to set the joint straight.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the restriction is ugly and swollen, then delay untying it for forty days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, called the two "fusciles," one of which is small and that supports the wrist;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and that is below, towards the little toe;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Sometimes only the large "fuscile" breaks, or sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bone is broken, restoration is easy and healing is quick;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	but when the large one is broken, healing is bad and more serious than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be gently stretched out and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it's the large dislocated joint, then it must be pulled back stronger;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	And stretch it over the cushion, and hold your hand pouch higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and let the patient lie across themselves, and put the cushion in front of them higher up, so that the patient does not suffer any strain;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend your arms below his hand or elbow, and another minister above it.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then the physician should place it even according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are broken fragments in the fracture, then each should be placed back in its proper position; and if any fragment is too short to grasp with forceps, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut off and remove the bone, as we have mentioned before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if there is also wound breaking, I have spoken about that in the specific chapter;
si pren la cure.	So take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration, hot abscesses appear, then take a bandage made of wax and rose oil that is neither too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and bind the bandage gently over it until the hot abscess is eased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the wax, and apply the plaster of mill powder with an abundance of egg whites, then place the splints, and make the splint for the broken bone stronger and a bit wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	And know that he must have six supports on his arm in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	Whether the break is in one bone or two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	And bind more tightly above the fracture than elsewhere, and all day long lessen when aligning, as I said at the beginning of this chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the lien after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must bathe the limb with warm water until this itch is soothed;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And let the limb rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then restart the bandaging, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	"And if it is observed that the bandaging cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it thus for several days until the inflammation arrives, and then apply restraint."
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, then do not untie him for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or if he extends his arms around him, then let him place his hands on his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And know that this dislocation can be restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and sometimes even in twenty, according to the mixtures and constitutions of the humours.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and around both wrists, there are few fractures; it is mostly dislocation that occurs.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the fingers of the hand are broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to sit crossed-legged and face straight ahead equally.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then he places his hand on a flat surface, and the ministers extend the broken bones, aligning them correctly until they are well-joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And applies the plaster and bandages if no abscess forms, then places a splint according to the size of the area.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the dislocation is around the wrist, then make a splint of cloth and tell the patient to bind it to their broken wrist.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And then bind it with a long bandage, and the splint should be as wide as the hand's length, binding it securely as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	"And if the fracture is on the back of the hand, then you must place a splint above it and another below in the palm so that the hand is open and straight. Then bind it all around the hand, and make sure the binding between both wrists is secure."
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if any break comes to us from the hand, whether it's dislocated, set it right as it should be.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and secure it with a splint, and if you see fit, place a small upright stick to lift the dislocation, but do not move it;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the dislocation is in another finger, such as the index or one of the others, set it right and bind it with the healthy finger next to it;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you can bind them all together at once, whichever works best, or place a splint on top, as in the case of dislocation.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And be careful with the restoration and placement of hot poultices, and protect those who are injured by it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Regarding the fractured hip:
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The thighbone is often broken; you can see this when the hip turns forward and backward.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And its restoration is accomplished by binding it above the break on one side and below it on the other.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then each servant extends his cloth to his respective side evenly;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is between the bones.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the dislocation is near the root of the thigh, then let one ligament be toward the knife handle, and the other ligament beneath the dislocation.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then the cloth should be placed by the knee, and the extension should be towards the foot;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then the physician places the bone evenly with both hands so that it is in its natural position, and then applies the splint, and the bandage, if any inflammation has come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is an inflamed abscess, leave it to cool down before returning to your work and treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap the fracture with two or three layers of hard bandage doubled over it, and fold back the excesses, then rotate the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and place a long thread between the hip and the leg, under the knee, and bring the ends of the thread upwards;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn up the bandage on the leg and thigh, then place the splints on the break, and place one splint on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then fill the empty space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth strips to hold it evenly in place, then begin binding it tightly with three or four turns around the break;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and as you go higher up on the break, make it less tight.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then take two threads that you placed between the leg and thigh, and tie three splints that are above them, then return to the bottom of the thread so that you come close to the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And bind it tightly so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until neither inflammation nor swelling nor anything similar occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if any such thing occurs, then untie it and dress whatever has happened, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are fragments of bone that stick out, they must be cut off if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	And if one cannot, then one must split the joint open and draw forth fire;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And perform the treatment as we have said until he is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the hip is broken thus when one puts splints there, such as on the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	However, the patient does not limp from this restoration made in this manner.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone is restored in about one month or a little less or a little more, depending on the differences in complexion.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know this: In the cruciate ligament of the knee there is little breakage, but it tears often.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is merely a crack or hole, and this happens with every wound, even without one. Everyone feels this.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is such that one places it evenly on what is round at its two ends so that they are assembled and can move;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then place the splint, and put a round splint there if necessary, and fasten it properly; then review all the arrangements that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar things;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply to each injury what is necessary until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is correctly called "mastella" and the other is called "ossicle";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And such breaking occurs equally in the leg, and therefore its restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all one. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely in every way.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fibula is broken, the foot turns inward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible;
et torne desoz.	and twists below.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then provide extension, place it evenly, and tie the splints evenly
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	But nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And align it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, then take two strips of bark from a tree that will encircle the leg on both sides and be as long as the leg from the knee downwards
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	and wrap two bandages over and under them, tying it in the middle so that the leg cannot incline to the right or left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And some apply splints of long poplar wood to the leg, and if it is made of wood, they place the leg to prevent movement, and this is properly done in fractures where there is wounding.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And move each day the leg, to see if there's heat or other accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the cure, then it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not suffer fractures, but sometimes bones in the foot are broken and so are the toes; and there are many ways of treating these injuries.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a bone fracture in the foot, and you see these bones protruding over one another, then place this patient's foot on the ground, as if they wanted to walk, and then place your foot on theirs where the bones are sticking out, and press down until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then place the splint and bandages on it, put a small table with two legs under the foot's belly, then bind the foot tightly, then wrap cloth strips around it, and other things you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any broken bones in the legs, restore them, just like we said for the hands.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place on both breaks a bandage according to the length of the leg, and let it be a bit wider, then place underneath the foot that table which I have mentioned, and hold it firmly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three breaks, or more, then place on each leg a bandage according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the table underneath the foot firmly.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And let it be so that when placed on top of the table, it touches the sole of the foot well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things I have mentioned for other breaks.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And treat each case as it deserves.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the thumb bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of a pregnant woman is broken, have her sit upright, then lean her towards the back part, and let her be held from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the womb of the pregnant woman with cotton, and insert as much as one fist.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then push down the woman, little by little lift up the back, and then the shoulder joint pops out until it reaches the entrance of the socket, and the bone returns with the socket.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wants to urinate, then remove the shoulder joint, and after she has done so, reset it; do this for seven days or thereabout.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If the bone is restored, then take a lamb's bladder and tie a tube to its opening, insert the entire bladder into the socket.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow into the tube vigorously until the bladder fills up inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The joint will then return to its place.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then fill it with cotton and leave it like this for a few days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the hand or foot of a man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have described for the thighbone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who study and practice this art, and may they understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	Because fracture indicates in many cases the right path to restoration:
enten le donques.	Then do it accordingly.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	When the penis is broken, take a goose's neck and insert it into the penis;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap it with bandages around, and leave it on for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for anyone who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or the arm or similar, to be healed now, according to the treatments that we have mentioned.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then rinse it with vinegar or nitre, and begin to restore the fracture at that same hour or day, provided that no fever ensues.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if a fever ensues, then delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the inflammation is calmed, and do not attempt to touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you cause further harm.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is exposed above the heart, then it is necessary for you to put it back in place quickly with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension does not align with your hands for even pressure, then use this iron tool that is seven or eight inches long, and its width should be according to the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and therefore it is necessary for the physician to mark three or four points on it, according to what is needed in each treatment of a fracture;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and it should be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your operation, and it should be pointed at the front and thicker towards the middle; thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palm" because the curved head must be placed on the exposed end of the bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And reset it once until it returns to its original position, with both sides evenly aligned.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is small and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone until the instrument can hold it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, such as a knife or saw, to your ability.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then scrape off what remains on the bone's surface and remove its small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If it is in place then moist a cloth in black vinegar and wipe it clean if it was inflamed;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	And do not apply any grease or other oily substance to the wound lest it cause decay and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then apply bandages once the bone has been reset, leave the wound uncovered, and cut the bandage all around according to the size of the wound, ensuring that the wound is not constricted by the dressing.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And many foolish doctors have done this, causing harm or death to the patient at times;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And let the bandaging be softer and gentler than other bindings.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad outcome will occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the location, do not put on bandages.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	Instead, wrap it with hard cloths, and tie them in place.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when after one or two days you see that the wound has begun to close, then remove what you have placed on it from all sides, and put on healing salve, such as tetrafarmacon salve and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	"And it is necessary that you wash the member twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is clean and healthy."
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	"And the limb must be positioned in such a way that the bowel moves down easily."
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	"And if many days pass and it does not heal but the bowel returns again, know that there are small bone fragments, so you must clean the wound with a cloth and remove all these unwanted pieces that cause this pain."
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula appears at the site, or some other kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in the chapter before this one.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the thighbone or shoulderbone, or other similar ones from large limbs, do not pull it out, for many die from this. Let it be until it rots.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	Perhaps it will fall off by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	But if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	"of the bruises that come on the sore"
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often hear questions about the health of fractures, especially when they are near a joint, and it is unpleasant to see the limb misfigured;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And sometimes the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Therefore, take heed if the bone is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If the administrator applies medicines that are astringent, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, ache, and similar others, then take some of these things, or all together, and combine them with astringent wine or with abundance of egg yolk or with honey;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	And place them on the bone in bandages, securing it well, and do not remove the bandages for many days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	Then dislocate it again, and begin another one, until the dislocation is removed;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	Or press on a well-made splint;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	For the property of wood is such that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	And if the dislocation has already become hardened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut above it, and remove the excess.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	When you apply it to any razor, until it is removed, and the treatment continues until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	"of the limb which becomes weak after the treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When a bone fracture has been reset, but afterwards the limb remains weak and slender, this happens due to many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	one reason is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bindings, preventing the limb from receiving proper nourishment;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or due to excessive rubbing.
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of excessive movement, not done at the right time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because there is little blood in their body, making them weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment for this is to have the patient eat well and exercise their body until their blood is increased within them;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer baths, giving them joy and ease.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply pitch to the limb so that it attracts great nourishment, and rub it often with cold water until the nourishment reaches the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and return to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	"of the limb twisted after the healing"
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone breaks openly, even though it loses its natural shape, its function remains unchanged:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	So do not believe those fools who say that one should break the limb anew, for many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	And such actions are blameworthy, and they cause great harm, and sometimes death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	However, if the joints and ligaments are fresh, they should be raised with hot water or mollifying herbs boiled in it, such as fig leaves, roots, and meadowsweet, among others;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and make a soft plaster using diacathylon or similar, and take the mucilage of figs, mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply the plaster;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you can take ripe figs, grind them with fennel seeds and similar medications that soften the joint.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes dislocation occurs due to prolonged and continuous rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And arrange for gentle movement of the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the crookedness is hardened and made rigid like stone, it must be cut out with iron; thus one should cut down to the bone gently with a fine incision tool.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And put effort and skill into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur when a joint is displaced from its proper place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, and the sufferer feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, it must now be reset without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	But if one delays, the area swells, and perhaps it is not reset properly.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	So one should not move it until the swelling has subsided:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Many times this causes pain and other discomforts;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	Nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient sweat, then let him rest until the inflammation has subsided;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the limb with warm water and oil, gently reset it, and care for each limb as it comes back into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have arranged chapters on dislocations from head to toe.
des mandibules	Of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It sometimes happens that the lower jaw becomes dislocated inward, and the dislocation of both jaws occurs in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	either they are slightly displaced from their places and softened;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	If they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the shoulder, and saliva flows from his mouth so that he cannot hold it in or close his mouth, and wraps his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is small, it returns by itself with more dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and full, then you must reset it quickly, without delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and do it in such a way that the assistants hold the patient's head, and the doctor places one hand behind the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on both sides.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	And let his other two hands be free to apply pressure evenly;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften and move his jaws in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the master will put it back in place until it returns to its proper position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the reset is painful, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then heat them with warm water and oil until they can be reset easily.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not delay in resetting them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, then place moistened cloths made of a poultice of rose oil and wax on top, then bind it gently with soft linen.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient lie on their back, with two pillows supporting their head so they do not move to the right or left nor try to chew, but rather consume soft food until the pains are gone and the jaw is healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then they may eat what they wish easily, and need not exert themselves to open their mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is fully healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if both jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their proper position, then fever and chills will ensue, and sometimes diarrhea, and sometimes vomiting of bile alone.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, know that it is useless.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many have died from this in nine days.
de la forcelle	Jaw dislocations are treated using forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The jaw cannot be dislocated on the side towards its continuity with the ear, and sometimes it is dislocated backwards, which can be felt distinctly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the treatment is that the patient lies often on their back with arms extended;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	Then press firmly with your palm to the spot, and it will return
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then place over the emplacement and wrap with bandages, and bind it tight;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	And the head that faces towards the side cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it does not, and if it dislocates even once, then reset it to its place as we have said
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then place over the emplacement and wrap with bandages, and bind it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And likewise, the head of the shoulder is reset when it is dislocated from its place
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder dislocates in only three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	the first way is when it dislocates towards the part of the hip below;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second way is towards the side of the breast;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and sometimes it may dislocate upwards, but this happens rarely
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and the shoulder does not dislocate backwards nor does it dislocate inwards for the nerves
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And often dislocated downwards towards the buttock, especially for those who have flesh on their bones, as it happens suddenly.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	For those with sufficient flesh, it scarcely happens and scarcely goes back in place.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes in certain men there is injury or fracture, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with heat and swelling, and they believe that it has been dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	You must therefore examine it until you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocations are when they are downwards towards the buttock, and there is a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, which you will find clearly different;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And at the head of the shoulder you will find a hollow, and below the buttock upon touching the head of the shoulder it will feel like an egg;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And the patient cannot bring their hand close to their neck nor move it in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	Also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden because you will find it clearly upon touching;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this manner of dislocation cannot be reduced, especially when it is recent or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places his fingers under the shoulder blade, and lifts the joint with force upwards to its place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the minister lifts up the hand and extends it outwards, then places it underneath.
si venra hastanment.	it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said within several days afterwards, then the patient must be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the minister should apply gently softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of ale and fennel and melilot in water, and it should be applied;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient should be placed on their back, and under the shoulder blade a pillow of even linen, not too soft nor too hard, then the master places his heel on the pillow, lifts up the head of the shoulder gently, and draws out the patient's hand;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another minister holds the patient's head so that it does not move downwards.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	This shoulder has returned entirely dislocated, and if you see it, reset it according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and make sure that a man who is taller than the patient is present;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and let him stand straight beside the cost side, and place his shoulder beneath the patient's hip, lifting the hip upwards so that the patient hangs by the armpit;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And another servant pulls the patient's hand down towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, hang something heavy on him, and the dislocation will return.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is also reset in this other manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is that one places a long stake in the ground, such that the head of the shoulder is as high as the fist, and not too thick nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then one places it beneath the patient, but let there be soft cloths underneath, and the patient stands along the length of the stake
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then stretch his hand down on the other side properly, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	And if it does not want to return because of all these things that we have said, do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a splint of 2 cubits long and 4 fingers wide, which has a round head so that it can enter deeply under the armpit, as follows:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then wrap the splinted wood around the shoulder below so that it does not burn or harm the patient. Then place it under the armpit of the patient.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	Stretch out the arm on the wooden support and tie the shoulder to it. Then put the arm on a sling made from a cloth of suitable width. Let the hand hang downwards and let the body hang freely on the other side.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint is now in place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, whatever way this may be, then you must put under the armpit a wad of wool equal in size; then place on the shoulder the emplastrum prepared with powder from the millstone, with incense and albumen of egg all around; then draw it under the armpit gradually, and turn the bandage over the emplastrum, and wrap the hand around its neck, and let it remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And he should eat little until the limb is comfortable again for it will heal more quickly.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	Then eat more after five or seven days and move the arm.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	If it is firm and softened again, then it has healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is removed from its place due to moisture that has come there or for another reason, then you must administer cauteries with three holes, as it is shown before in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this and after seven days the dislocation still occurs, and he cannot lift his arm up again, know that the nerves of the shoulder head are either cut or stretched or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And know that the joint will never again be set right.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that occurs toward the arm and breasts or behind is caused by forceful impact and extension of limbs, whereupon one applies another restraint.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat it until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing pain comes to the member and slowness in movement, then the sick person should take many baths until that pain is alleviated and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated easily and easily returns to its position.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And if it has been dislocated in all directions, especially front and back, the dislocation will not remain unseen or unnoticed.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Dislocated according to each position.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick limb with the healthy one, so you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder completely.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you must reset it before an abscess forms there, for if an abscess were to form, it would be difficult to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	Indeed, it may not always be possible to fully reset it, especially when it is dislocated behind the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	So this dislocation is worse than others and causes more pain, and sometimes death occurs.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And its restoration is such that, if it can be reset, you stretch out his hand with both of your hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And his arms should be spread out, and the hands of the surgeon placed along the elbow on top and bottom, and push the joint into his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is forwards, then it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and pushes the neck that is dislocated from the root of the palm.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	And two ministers should extend the arm, and two ministers should hold it so that it does not move during the extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	Then twist the arm in each direction, after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth doubly around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the surgeon has joined the joint with his hand, then he should anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, and then forcefully push the joint until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in its place, then put on a dry compress with egg yolk, and bind it tightly, and hang the arm around the neck of the patient, leaving it for some days before removing it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, then untie it and leave it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint is not properly aligned, then recommence the emplacement and untie it, leaving it thus for a few days until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	Then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if there is great pain after the resetting of the joint and it moves, then bathe and gently rub it and press until it is soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or you put on the joint a poultice of fat mutton, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make it enter into a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when it sweats, if you gently rub the joint, then put back on the poultice and then enter the bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do thus twice or thrice until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see that, then put on fine wet hay heated with butter and bind it.
si revenra a sa disposition.	If it returns to its position
li dislocation de la main	Dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The dislocated shoulder joint, and its return is easy, more so than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it must be reset promptly to its place, in the very opening where it was dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the resetting is thus: place the affected hand on a table, extend the minister's hand, and the physician places theirs evenly, so that their palm presses against the front of the joint, pushing until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Still, you must ensure it is properly in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient places the back of their hand on the table, and the physician places his hand on the surface of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, apply cold compresses to soothe any heat and swelling, and allow it to rest without beginning again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if the patient cannot bear it, and you are unable to put it back into place after several days, then the joint remains dislocated;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	And let not even fire harm the patient unless his hand is weakened, and he cannot grasp anything entirely.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Then know that the nerves are cut or the artery.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other means of heat than to burn with fire nearby the case, and sometimes nothing else may help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	"And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then remove it and leave it so."
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	"If he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then apply warm water poultice, and rub it until it becomes flexible."
de la dislocation des dois de la main	"On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes both hands are dislocated at each end, sometimes at the back of the palm or the front.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then stretch out your hands, and push the dislocation back into its socket until it returns, then hold the head of the hand, and bend it towards the side where it was dislocated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	And leave it for two days, and on the third day make it even.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	And withhold the food as we have said, both during the day of the dislocation and the following days, but do not move it and tie it up.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this often until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the front of the hand, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And likewise when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	"On the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back"
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	"If the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are several dislocations, then there is no remedy, for death quickly ensues."
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the sign of this is that the evacuations come forth involuntarily and cannot be retained, and often some limbs become softened, especially the two thighs or the two arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And oftentimes the backbone moves in four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which moves at the rear is called 'gilbositez':
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment is: if the gilbositez has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	There is no remedy nor healing for it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from a fall or blow or similar things, the old authors spoke of various treatments with grand words, but they have little benefit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have summarized it according to my intention and have formed instruments in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that there is no remedy nor healing for the gilbositez that comes at the breast before;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also that which comes straight into both sides, and one cannot cure it except for that which comes properly at the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	It is necessary for the patient to lie upon their back on a flat surface, with something underneath them so that they do not bruise themselves.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then firmly plant one poker at the head and another at the feet on the ground, bind a rope tightly around the patient's thighs, then at the hips, knees, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	And two assistants hold the ropes, one at the head and another at the feet, between the two pokers
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be securely closed with the poker as we have described, then the physician places their palms firmly on the spine until it yields.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if the spine does not yield with this treatment, then take a board three spans long and place it under the patient's back while they are on their side, and put one end of the board under the spine, then place the middle of the board on the spine
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and the physician places their feet on the other end of the board and presses firmly until the spine yields to its proper place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see one, do it on the shoulder that rotates towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is necessary that you insert two stakes at the head of the sick person's arm, and towards the feet two others; and there should be between each stake, above and below, a palm's length of space.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and let there be one hole in each stake where the shoulder rotates, and let the stakes be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each of the two stakes let there be one turning stake, over which the sling rotates, and let there be in both turnings two small stakes a palm's length long, for turning the shoulder.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the sling that is among the stakes to the shoulder stake towards the head, and the other sling towards the feet at the other stake; and each of the assistants should turn their stake for all the sling, and the master shall place the sling evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then place a drying plaster with plenty of egg on it, and then the compresses, and then the pestle of a tablet three fingers long, which should press upon the location of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a linen bandage, as we have said, and let the patient use gentle nourishment until they are healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if something comes to prevent recovery at the end of healing, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines with the pestle that we mentioned earlier.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And sometimes one administers a piece of flax, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and it is thought that this may be dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	And it is the bone which opens, therefore one must not presume there.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	Perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	"Dislocations of the hip"
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder, there come forth only dislocations, not like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the articulation of the hip is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	Inside and outside, front and back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	And more so inside than others, especially the dislocation before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the recognition of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee opens more than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee in front of the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the place that is near is swollen with hot abscess because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one whom it happens outside is that this accident is opposite to those in front
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the sign of one who has it in front is that their leg is well stretched according to its completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Nevertheless, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot move forward, and he retains his urine, and the angle swells, and when he walks, he drags his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of one whom it happens behind is that he cannot straighten or bend his knee, and this leg is twisted compared to the other; the ankle is softened, and the bone of the thigh is located below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The reduction of this kind of dislocation is that you wait if the dislocation is ancient, and it remains according to its position, so there is no treatment;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And there must be no presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four kinds of dislocation, you should quickly reposition the joint, stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	Perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant, and stretch the leg strongly with both hands, or tie it to something above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And another assistant extends his hand in such a way that he places his hands under the buttocks, then tightly binds it with a soft rope above the hip.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And another holds the end of the rope.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	Then everyone pulls up and down at once so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of stretching applies to four types of dislocation. If the dislocation has returned [to its normal position], as we have said, that is good
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then treat it according to its similarity.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is at the hip joint, you should lay the patient on their healthy side, then place the rope at the root of the hip and under the angle, then pull the rope up towards the angle and towards the thigh.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then take another helper's arms, and embrace the hip bone of the sick person tightly, and stretch it towards the front strongly:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	And now it will return to its place:
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	This manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have described, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a soft rope at both heels and knees, and let the sick leg extend two fingers more than the other:
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then hang it over the top of a stick, and raise it two arm-lengths above the ground;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command one helper to embrace the top of the hip bone, and have another helper hang with the patient, embracing the hip bone strongly, for the joint will now quickly return.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is forward, have the patient lie down, as we have described for those with dislocations of the knee, and remove the rope from the sick leg properly, and also from the foot;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two torches, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert one torch between the thighs of the patient in this manner;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And have moistened cloths ready to tie around it so that the patient does not burn, then each minister extends towards him, and the physician places his hand evenly on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, then place upon [a] table, and press as we have said in the case of kyphosis; let the patient lie on their sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is before you, then quickly extend the patient's affected leg, as I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And the physician places his knee over the patient's thigh, then presses with his other hand, and extends down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, then it should not extend the patient downwards nor lift them up from the ground; rather, they should be positioned as if the hip was dislocated at the back, just like we have described for childbirth on two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and they should lie face down, and the ligatures extended as we have said before, and all must press upon the joint with the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	And the condition will improve when the patient extends their legs, with them being even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then join the thighs, place the splint, and secure it with a bandage so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And after three or four days, remove it, then place the splint on top;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	If you see that they are even, then secure it again as before and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then remove it, and let him walk gently until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Chapter on dislocation of the knee joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee can be dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	That is to say, inward, outward, and behind;
et ne desalue point devant.	And it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	The sign is this: have the patient bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not reach their thigh, then know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the reduction for all of them is this: have the patient sit upright, extend their leg if they can, place your back against their face, and put their foot on yours;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take his knee in your palms, and withdraw it between your thighs, then bend both sides of the knee strongly.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And another assistant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign that it is correctly reset is when he can move his leg easily at the hip.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	Then apply the plaster on top and secure the leg to the hip with bandages, binding them tightly for three or four days, then untie it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And let the patient not walk at all until the member is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	**And if the limb is not completely healed, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of dislocation of the hip, until it is fully set.**
de la dislocation dou talon	Chapter on dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	"The heel can sometimes be wry and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	The sign that it is dislocated is when the ankle is swollen and sticks out on the side where it is dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The reset should be easy, and one can easily extend the arm with their hands when it is only slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit upright and have one assistant hold him firmly by the leg above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then lift it up high and place the foot well up high;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, lifting and drawing the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, that's good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If not, then start again the operation, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it still cannot return in this way, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly plant a post into the earth between their thighs, and tie the ropes around to prevent injury to the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then the ministers take hold of the thigh, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with a rope so that it lies on the collarbone of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister stretches equally, and let the post always be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient steady when lifting him.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then the doctor puts his hands equally on the dislocation, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it has reached its peak, then place the plaster and swabs on it, press strongly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch carefully the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the binding is not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then let it be for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, then press strongly.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid walking to the patient for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he walks before this time, there is no certainty that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"If inflammation occurs around the dislocation, you must calm it as we have described elsewhere until it is healed."
des dois	Chapter on dislocations of the fingers
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	"When the fingers are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, which is easy to do."
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the joints at the back of the foot, then have the patient sit on a flat surface or on a stool completely upright, and place your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press strongly with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is aligned and nothing opens up, then place under the sole of the foot a two-legged stool, then press strongly, and let it be for three days, then untie it;
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Chapter on wounds accompanied by dislocations
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When an injury occurs with the dislocation, and it is reset, many times the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	So do not be presumptuous in the treatment unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it extensively, and if you are compassionate, merciful, and cautious, not hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And use soothing remedies for a hot abscess at the beginning, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	But when you do see hope, reset the limb now before the hot abscess comes
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is in place, administer remedies to cool the inflammation and treat the wound with drying ointments
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there is also fracture or small bones dislocated, set them, and do as we have said in simple fractures
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And guard against entering into fear, according to what I have said, for it benefits you more to move according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your soul and body.
