O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the end of the knowledge of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have finished it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and entirely abandoned everywhere, therefore its science has perished and been destroyed, and there remains nothing except small descriptions in books that hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and foolishness, intentions are closed off, and science is disregarded.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Now it seems to me that I wish to enliven it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will bring together the shapes of the irons for cauterization, and other tools of this work with the arrangement of their declaration and preparation as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters of surgery found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And therefore whoever undertakes it must climb up into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and the movement and course of veins both moving and resting, and where they originate.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And therefore Hippocrates says that a name without a deed is little, and with a deed it is much.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and indeed in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before should guard himself so that he does not fall into error and harm others.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	thus I have seen many times those who meddle with this science and abandon their science and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and cut the arteries in her neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	thus so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And another doctor who drew a stone from a man's urine, and the stone was large.
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	So he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died three days later.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the size of the stone, and knew well that if he were cut open, he would surely die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And saw another doctor who took in care Duke our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking he had a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the doctor full of ignorance bound the break upon the wound like stars with great carelessness, and left no bandage to the wound, and left him thus at the end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	And he commanded that he not untie it.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	So that the leg was entirely swollen and the foot, and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come unbind the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I heard it unbound, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all passage for corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the whole limb was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who drained an inflamed black apostume and then cauterized it out of the malice of his mastery.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is purged of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be completely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	That is to say, surgery where there is danger in many situations;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	So that foolish doctors may not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	Therefore, take your arms with caution, undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and choose the best way so that through God's grace you achieve salvation and are praised;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	And leave frightening diseases to those skilled in difficult cures.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the next in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says in some of his teachings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	'Do not undertake a bad disease, lest you be called a foolish doctor.'
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, ordered from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the forms of instruments, and the irons for cautery, and everything necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, cupping glasses, wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and this chapter is ordered with the forms of instruments
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisted limbs, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered from the head to the feet, with the forms of instruments
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you about the quality of each temperament and its harm.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of the helper and his harmfulness are a lengthy and subtle science, as well as secret answers;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and about this many wise men spoke, and they agreed upon it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	they let me speak few words, for I fear length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery is generally beneficial to every complexion where there is matter, except two:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	It is to know: hot temperament without matter, and dry temperament without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry temperament with matter, some people divide it and say that cautery is great help there;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	And others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	That cautery is not useful for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat hot diseases due to heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	And he who said the opposite said that cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases that occur in men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	But when you compare the body and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it so by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any case, do not meddle with fire cautery unless you have experienced it and know well the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of temperaments among men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the conditions and seasonality of the air.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	We are not afraid of other temperaments, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all physicians agreed on the use of cauteries.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know this, son, that fire together with cautery is among the secrets of cures and has greater virtue than a cautery made from burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not go beyond the member that is burned, and does no harm to any other member if it could.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Hot medicines spread from member to member by cauterizing, causing painful inflammation in the members;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And by chance, he may kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire alone does not cure unless there is an excess of it.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experience and the length of service and study that I have put into this art, which is based on the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And therefore I apologize for the length of my speech, as I do not wish to deprive you of the secret that is hidden in fire and its quality of work, how it overcomes diseases of the body, as philosophers say in their demonstrations.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	Or receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be made and chose priests for this purpose.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	I say that cautery is suitable at all times because the harm that arises is kept under control by its aid.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And especially, cauteries are necessary for immediate and urgent pains which cannot wait until the member suffers greater harm.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear son, as foolish physicians do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	For the disease healed by cautery does not relapse
et il le dient ensi;	And they say thus
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	But it is not so as they believe, for cauteries are no more a medicine that changes complexion and dries the humors causing pain than any other medicine, valued more for its speed of action than for its virtue and power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it can happen that the disease comes sometimes according to the constitution of the patient, and the place of the disease and its strength
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	And excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, except for cauteries administered where there is little excess or moisture, such as those used for toothache and similar pains, which do not return.
mais ce avient poc.	But this happens rarely
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the "derrière" of medicine, and that is true.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	But they do not believe that cauteries are valued after medicines, but their intention is false, and cauteries are called the "derrière" of medicine because when we apply various treatments for some diseases and they do not work, then we apply cautery, which is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cauteries of gold are gentler than those of iron; they said this because of the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	And they said that the place of cautery does not cause decay, but this is not entirely true as I have tested and found it to be so in some men
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And cauteries of gold are worth more than those of iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	Moreover, when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell by its color alone whether it is hot enough; it cools quickly.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if one heats it too much
si font au feu;	one puts it in the fire
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And thus there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use iron cauteries that we have better prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have arranged this chapter from top to bottom so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two kinds made:
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The shape of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine moistening the head for three or four nights, according to what the patient's strength and age and habit can tolerate
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the fire behind the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit crossed-legged between your hands, with his hands on his knees;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And let where your middle finger comes be the spot to burn with the cautery called 'olivare', of which this is the shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the marked spot, and move it downwards and outwards, little by little, turning your hand.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then raise your hand gently, and reward yourself if you see a bit of bone appear;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you don't see it, then continue with the cautery until you see the bone as I told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	then take a bit of thread, and place soft cotton inside it, then put it on the spot, leaving it there for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	then put on soft cotton soaked in butter;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it on until the burn is healed;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmacum" until it is clean.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, it purges itself more.
et por ce si aide mues.	and therefore movement helps.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	"And some of these say that one should allow the cautery to burn until part of the bone is charred, and then remove what has been burnt off the bone, and it should be healed."
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that one should hold the cautery on so long and press it so hard as to abrade bone as thick as a woman's spindle used for spinning, so that the humors flow out more freely.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must leave the wound open for a long time
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	afterwards one should dress and bind it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauteries do not seem entirely good to me except in some people where there is room for fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems better to me that I should leave them.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head is weakened by continuous dissolving of its nature, as we witness in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and even when the head of a patient is weak by nature, I find the first type of cautery to be more saving and gentle, and I use this one now together with safety.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	"from the ancient pain of the head"
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When the whole head is afflicted with chronic pain that lasts a long time, the patient should use ointments and pills called "cochie," and perform head purging and apply oils and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	And if one performs the cautery we mentioned earlier, it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Beware if the patient's head is strong in nature and not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	In such case, cauterize him a little below the one we mentioned earlier.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After performing cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone as we said earlier, perform cautery at the location called "vessels.
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	And this is where cupping glasses are placed.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	And raise your hand so that you do not see down to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels much greater pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak of it elsewhere.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	And the cauteries on the horns must be more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle of the head, and this is the method:
dou cautere dou chief	"of the cautery of the head"
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain comes in a part of the head, and the illness extends to the eye, and the head is purged by cleansing medications, and all the other treatments I mentioned in the division of illnesses are done, yet nothing helps:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Then make cauteries in two ways, namely with hot water and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cautery with hot water is thus: take a pennyworth of aloes, peel it and crush two parts for the two temples, then make an incision in the forehead where the pain lies so that you can place the crushed aloes under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it is placed there, tie it up tightly and leave it thus for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	Then untie it and draw out the pennyworth of garlic, and let the wound remain thus for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then place a piece of cotton soaked in butter on top until it protrudes from the wound.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the dressing has healed completely;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see that, then perform some of the cauterizing medicines I have written about or treat with cauterizing medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery follows this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which this is the shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called 'closed' because the head is shaped like a clove with a depression in the middle and a small opening in the midst;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful spot, then hold your hand and twist the fire lightly until half of the point of the heart-shaped blade is burned;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is behind, and let abundant blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterward, apply cotton wool soaked in oil and leave it on the spot for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply cotton moistened in wax, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is clean.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called 'cultellare', do so at its entire tip, being careful not to touch the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	de migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat migraine as we have mentioned earlier in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterization previously described in medicine does not help, then you must heat the cautery called "culterellare" until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	And take thus on the pulsating place a line half the length of two fingers, and lift your hand once, ensuring that you do not touch the artery and that you do not go as far as the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	And beware of the jawbone that moves when chewing, and let the nerve have no regard for its movement so that spasms do not come upon the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting may cause great fear, especially to one who is not skilled and experienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	And leave the wound open in mid-air;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it is appropriate in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient endures pain, cauterize him by the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on artery extraction, with the cautery having two blades;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And these cauteries are better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Here is the French text for "of the pain of the ears due to cold":
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When cold pain comes to the ear and one has opened medicinal solutions thereupon and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "pointe"
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After, prick all around the painful ear, or around both if the pain holds in both, and mark the spot a little away from the root of the ear where you will start.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	And make ten pricks around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, treat it until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the Torture of the Mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Only torticollis that moves from fluid should be cured by cautery;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	And do not perform cauteries on those similar ones that come from heat and inflammation of the nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this kind of affliction that moves due to the flow of water and cleansings of the head and gargling, if it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and another a little behind the temple, and the third between the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery mark above the head of the ear somewhat below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger joint;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery until half of the brand is burned.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And that is the shape of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And this type of cauterizing knife is similar to what we have shown before, but it is slightly more delicate and the blade should be a bit thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the place as I said before, make sure it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	If you have an ancient case of apoplexy which you treat as we have said and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauteries on them.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two cauteries on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where it is called "vessels," as we have mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And they should be treated as we have said previously.
de litargie	Of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large drinks and pills that cleanse the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	Then raise the patient's head up completely, and place on their occiput the plaster of mustard that is written about in the treatise on plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	And this is the method for cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	If you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he becomes better in this way, then it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if he does not improve, make three cauteries on the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	And treat it as you would others; if you see him sweat, then apply the cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if necessary, apply two more on either side of the first two, and continue treating until healed.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	And let the cautery used be called 'olivare', as I have mentioned before.
de la froidor dou chief	Of coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hairs and of those things which we have mentioned before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After raising the patient's head, then apply the cautery to the top of the head, on each horn, and one behind and three along the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	And if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, then apply four cauteries along the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And let him remain until the strongest heat has passed, then raise your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	Then treat until healed, using the cautery called 'olivare', which we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The person suffering from epilepsy should not use a fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic. It is necessary to first modify the brain with remedies and other treatments that we have mentioned in the previous division, especially when the patient is large and tolerant of difficult medical treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, have them gargle and chew soft foods frequently to cleanse the brain.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	Then place the king's head in the middle, and perform the cautery as we have mentioned before, and cauterize the vessel and each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is strong and enduring, perform cauteries as I have said for those with paralysis and weakness of body, on the spine of the back and neck, using olive oil according to the method I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, apply one subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When excesses or corrupt humors are present due to melancholy, then apply the cautery of many cauteries as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the excess is inclining towards melancholy due to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is mentioned beforehand in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	Then place the patient's head.
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	Next, make a linen bandage, also like a circle, and put it on the head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	And let the patient sit cross-legged, and be held firmly on all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	Next, present the lint, and melted old sheep's butter.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	Heat it over a moderate fire until the dough can withstand having the hot water poured onto it;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After emptying the circle from within around the head, let it cool down.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this to the patient once each week with another good regimen until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	But if you want to cauterize it, make several punctures all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery moistens the brain excessively;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	And then place moistened cotton in butter and chicken fat upon it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the water of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When water comes first to the eyes with the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin by giving the patient something to drink that cleanses the head and guards against all moistures, and make them sweat or take several baths fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After the patient reclines their head back, perform a cautery on the head and make two cauteries on both temples if the descent of the eye is affected at both eyes together, or one cautery on the temple where the descent occurs.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And cut all veins and arteries that are below the heart beneath each cautery, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And beware of loss of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	I will teach you how to extract arteries and make an incision with caution how you should extend them;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And sometimes a cautery or hot iron is applied beneath the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are chronic and accustomed and lie upon the veins or near the arteries that appear on the forehead.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and one sees that they are cold surplus of phlegm, then he performs the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the forehead descending towards the eyes.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I perform one cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hot irons beneath the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if there is need for more, then he cauterizes the eyebrow bloodily above each small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat according to what we have said in this division and it does not help at all, then give the patient three nightshade apples to drink.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king's head, he performs a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And perform two cauteries called 'clavilis' on the two shins, a little below the knees;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	And beware of the artery that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivary.
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the shape
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see, perform two cauteries on the two shins as long as the hairs are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave your hand there except until about a third of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have spoken of.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelashes turn inward and prick the eye; in this case cauteries are performed in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	That is to say, by fire, or by burning medication.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your hand;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After tracing on paper the shape of an eye that resembles the opening of a mussel shell; let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then place damp cotton in egg white and powdered rose leaves on the eye; then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	Then cauterize along the figure you have traced, little by little many times, until the skin is burned at that spot.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the sign of the work's health is that you see the paper retreat and the hairs stand upright at the tip of the eye.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then lift your hand, leave it like this for three days; then place damp cotton in butter until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, apply ointment until it is sound.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hairs grow back and the paper becomes softened, then begin the cautery again on that same spot, just as you did at first.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	If the hairs are missing, cauterize until the skin lifts back to its natural level and becomes even, without pricking the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The cautery of fire used in medicine should be ordered to the patient so that they let their hairs grow long and even, then make a shape like the leaf of a myrtle from parchment.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take one dram each of French soap and live chalk, grind them together thoroughly.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf and place it over the paper covering the eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	If the patient has disease in one eye only, work on that one; if both eyes are affected, do so for both.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	And place moistened cotton under the eye with a sparrow's egg.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	Hold the patient's head steady in your hand and place your two fingers over the medicine, pressing gently on it each time the patient feels the heat of the medicine, as they will feel heat like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the cauterization is over, then lift up the wound, and check if you see the paper raised as it would be by the constraint of fire or by incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then apply more medication to the wound where the medication has not opened until your work is even, and your eyes are on target;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place cotton soaked in butter over it until the heart's heat subsides, afterward cleanse the wound with ointment called 'diaphoresis' and others until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must take great care in your work, lest any medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes moist afterward, and the hairs prick at the eye, then recommence the medication on that wound which has softened from the proper paper, just as you did before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cleanse it until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And this is the form of cauterizing with a hot iron:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this let your constraint be.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and let not the straight path be closed off to him who practices this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	The translation of "de la cure de fistule par cautere" is:
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help at all, then you must perform a cautery on it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place their head on your hand;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	And take the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or turn its head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	then place cotton moistened with egg white or onion juice on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	Then heat the cautery that is thus shaped:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and is shaped like the top of a dove's feather, with the cautery being level together;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	If you see it, let one end be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see it, let it also be like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but nevertheless, this which is shaped is more useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	Then press the fistula if it is open, and remove the corruption and dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	And if it is closed, then open it, and draw forth the bowels.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	Then place the hot cautery firmly upon it, and keep your hand on the cautery at the part of the eyelid above the eye, so that your hand does not act foolishly.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And place the cautery in the fat around the eye, and burn it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you reach the bone at the beginning of the cautery, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then repeat the cautery once more, and again if necessary, and leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After that, put on gauze moistened in butter, and continue the drying ointment until it is healed. And if after forty days it has not healed, then apply a caustic medicine until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	And follow the king according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is also a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand this: fistulas, cut them open;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Then insert into the opening one small tube made of this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	And they do it to the amount of one-third of a pound;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand firmly over the cauterizing tool, and let the patient not move his head at all, so that the molten lead does not spill onto his eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and one must put on the patient's eye moistened cotton dipped in egg whites or egg yolk:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The lead is then placed at the location of the fistula, and healing occurs miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	**And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have spoken of, that is good.**
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	**If not, then it is necessary to administer a probe to the nose and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body of the nose.**
des crevaices en levres	"cracks in lips"
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	"Often, cracks in the lips called 'splits' occur, especially on children's lips."
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	"If you treat these cracks according to what we have said in divisions and the treatment does not work, then heat a small cautery knife according to this shape:"
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And quickly place it in those crevices until it reaches the source;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply cerate to the location until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	"of the boil on the throat"
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess forms at the root of the throat, in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes decay and rot, becomes inflamed, and turns into a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said through incisions, but it does not help:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then you must apply cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	After the blow or puncture of the fistula, keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches its base, and behind it;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this once or twice, after the treatment we have described in our cures, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	And if it is cured thus, that is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	But if not, then uncover the spot and remove the rotten bone according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	"of the movement of teeth"
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't help, then put the patient's head in your lap.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After heating the cautery whose shape will be described below, so that you place a band around the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	And quickly put the hot cautery inside and keep your hand there until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	Then lift your hand and resume the cautery according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After, the patient fills their mouth with salted water, holds it for an hour, and expels rich fire.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	"And in this way the tooth that was moving becomes fixed, and the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupt moisture dries up."
de la dolor des dens	"of toothache"
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When tooth pain comes from coldness, where there is coldness or wind, and the treatments of medicine do not help, then there is need for a cautery in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow, put the tip into an iron or brass spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, dip it in melted butter, quickly place it on the painful tooth, and hold until it cools.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. Then if you see that wrapping wool and cotton in cold butter and placing it on the aching tooth helps, heat iron until fire comes to the tip of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cauteries made of fire are such that you should take one made of iron or brass, and it should be so thick that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, which will be described later, place it on the tooth and keep your hand there until the cautery is cooled;
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be relieved that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then rinse well;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery of whatever size you desire, and according to your ability;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	And this is the shape of the tin can:
des scrophules	"Regarding scrofula"
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When scrophules are caused by phlegm and cold moistures and are not responsive to digestion through medicines, then heat the hair cautery, of which the shape is given below, and let it have two openings for the smoke to exit from the other end;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice until it reaches the base of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	If the abscess is small, apply a cautery according to its size, and leave it on for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	And apply moistened cotton in butter until the burn is healed.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cautery:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture prevails in the pores of the lungs, especially when it is due to a cold temperament, then the patient must first be evacuated by soluble medications.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	Then apply a cautery at the root of the throat, ensuring not to go all the way up to the throat and not to burn deeply but only slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	Then apply another cautery at the junction of the neck and head of the spine, using the cautery called "clavicle," as shown above.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the area until it is healed, as previously mentioned.
de la toust	"of cough"
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all diseases of the lungs are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or cough, and if it is an old disease, apply two fire cauteries on the chest in empty places.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	And one cautery between the breasts near the nipples
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cautery called "clavile" be made according to the shape described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see fit, apply a cautery prick at every point where the cautery called "pointe" is used, whose shape is depicted above in diseases of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let there be up to thirty points, or as many as needed around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterward treat the area according to what is said earlier, and use a cautery with three rows according to this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	"And because cauteries are lighter by making three at once."
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	"of the dislocation of the auxiliary ligament"
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder blade is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterward, make the patient lie on their back and side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	then raise the heart which is inside the armpit with the fingers of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated inward, heat the cautery that has two branches until it resembles this shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the lung until it pierces through to the side, and the figure of the cautery should resemble four cauteries combined.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	And therefore cauterization is done with a cautery having three heads, because the marks of cauterization are six.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves are as fine as a thread, and that is the shape of the cautery with three heads:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is added onto this 1 nerve, therefore there are 8 cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	Afterwards place on the cautery powdered wormwood with salt;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	then let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until they are well strengthened.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upward, which happens rarely, then perform a cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavile, or many pricks with the cautery.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For once the joint is closed and the moisture removed, the patient will be healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and excessive moisture accumulate in the stomach, altering its complexion and increasing phlegm despite customary treatments showing no benefit, then the patient should lie on their back, extend their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Then perform three cauteries: one beneath the elbow of the arm equal to two fingers, entirely covering the clavicle, and two cauteries on either side of the ribs so that the marks of the cauteries form three angles, with enough space between each other so they do not join together when they throw out corruption.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	And let the cauteries be deep enough to reach both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without deviation:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see someone cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and whoever fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and holding it on the stomach for one point according to the amount you see fit;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with all of the cautery that is called 'point'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment described above, ensure it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver suffers pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, so much that it is far removed from its natural composition due to excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, but it does not help him, then the patient must be made to vomit.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and apply three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, avoiding the hypochondria, where the rib cage comes.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	And keep a space of two fingers between each cautery;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauteries be long in length and do not press your hand too much on all of the cautery.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	And let only half of the heart burn, and let the patient lie on his right side.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	And if he cannot do this, then let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms.
et c’est li forme:	This is the method:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if it is your will, then cauterize these cauteries of the knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and ensure that you do not burn all the heart, for you would cause the whole body to dry up.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And let it not come near the belly, for the heart is very delicate there, and the flesh also.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too strong.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if it is in the membrane, he feels madness-making pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And then, when this treatment is applied by physicians, the patient must be made to sweat on his head.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then, press firmly on the spot where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Here is its shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery until the flesh is burned and come to siphon, so that all pus flows out.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After treating according to the treatment of abscesses until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And only those who have studied medicine for a long time and by whom many such illnesses have been cured should use this cautery.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he can daringly operate; nevertheless it seems to me that it is better for him to leave (it).
dou cautere de pleuresin	Regarding the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make cauteries for pleurisy with roots of bistort, in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a large, dry root of bistort, as thick and long as your two fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	And boil it in oil, then take it to the fire and make one large cautery between the shoulder blade and neck, and two smaller ones a little way down towards the area under the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And place two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly backward.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And one cautery in the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on both sides of the breast below the cautery between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	Do not press your hand, but hold it open as in smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancient authorities say that certain men used to employ a fire cautery resembling that of a barber, heating it and placing it between the ribs until it reached the abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And when there is pain outside, as we have said concerning the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	Yet in this operation there is fear, for the patient may die now, or a fistula may occur which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Regarding mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of mice according to what we have said in the division of cures, and it does not help at all, then there are 3 good ways of cautery that can be used:
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	One method is to make three or four cauteries in a line according to the length of the mouse's body, following the shape of the liver cautery that we have described earlier.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	And do not press your hand during the entire cautery process, and let the patient lie constantly on their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	And another method of cautery is to heat the cautery that has two edges, as we have shown in the case of shoulder dislocation;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And raise the heart that is at the mouse, where the cost of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation be according to the height of the body, and the width of the cautery should be according to the breadth of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	Afterwards, thrust the two flaming edges so that the heart is pierced from the other side, then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you wish, cauterize with all three edges of the cautery.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After this treatment, if it has thrown off corruption over a long period of time, then it is better than the other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	A fire cautery is not suitable for a dropsical person, except in the manner called "ascites.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries around the neck, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one at the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	And let the cautery be placed close to the spearhead of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards, leave the cautery open for some time to expel corruption, and do not neglect the patient's care after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And healing would hasten, and both intentions would be together with God’s help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the belly is the one we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	And that for the back be olive-shaped, as it is depicted here.
de l’enfleure des piez	Edema of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet of one suffering from dropsy are swollen and filled with yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply at first; thus one would avoid causing injury like that caused by the aw within the citrine, and let the cauterization be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Then make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the shinbone.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	And let fire cauteries remain on longer without being cleaned until they are discharged.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After treating other wounds as we have described.
de la menoison	Of the dislocation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When an attack of colic comes from coldness and dampness, so that the retaining and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by ordinary remedies;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	And you see the patient suffering greatly and having strong virtue, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what was spoken of previously in the cautery for the stomach, using the circular cautery.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	And four small cauteries around the navel like one cautery on each side of the spine, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	"And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, make them a cautery on the point, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid."
de la cure des emorroydes	"Of the Cure of Hemorrhoids"
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When hemorrhoids are on the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of thick corrupt cold and moist humors, and have been treated by division as we have said without success, then apply cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	III upon the spine of the back, that which is all deflected below toward the shoulder-blade little by little in a triangle shape, and [apply] the cautery beneath the armpit II times;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that its stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then apply one great cautery to the stomach as it is stated before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen at all cautery points
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery remain on for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, heal the place until it is clean.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	"Of the Fleshy Growth Called 'Thelul'"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut into fat tissue, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it all ablaze upon that cut fat.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand remain there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, where the blood flows out
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much fat tissue, cauterize each one as we have said
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	afterwards, use ointments to aid in healing until they are clean.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on alcatraz, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	"Of a Wound Poorly Treated"
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening,
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula occurs and becomes inflamed and filled with rottenness and corrupted moisture, you should probe it gently with the tip of your finger, ensuring that you know the full depth of the opening.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	And after heating the cautery which resembles a razor, put it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent entered there, and begin again with the cautery until those corrupt and rotten bodies are burned, once or twice or three times, depending on what is needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	And beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, then beware of these places, and do not perform this operation except in a fleshy area, and think that it is not persistent.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	Then heal the place until it is clean, and if the place is healed, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is entirely healthy.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	And if the matter is not removed, know that the place is wounded, and the bone at the front is rotting.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And so like one of those we will mention later.
de la maladie des reins	Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and from great flatulence, and she does not menstruate, then you must perform a fire cautery on her kidneys on both sides with the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned before.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauteries in a row, and this will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is weak and flaccid from cold and moisture so that the patient retains urine, then perform cautery on the front part of the bladder where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, with each cautery being as long as a barleycorn.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	And perform one cautery at the back if necessary.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	And let the clavicle cautery be according to the shape mentioned before.
de la marris	Of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the womb is cold and moist, preventing conception due to this reason, and the menstrual flow is corrupt with delayed periods,
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, great pain is felt:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary that one performs three cauteries around the bladder, as we have said regarding the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back:
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and the cautery should be performed with a hot iron, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hair
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh appears longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and the location of the joint's separation is found, then you must cauterize the patient around the hip joint with one circular cautery, and seal around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and let the cautery be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not available, then perform three large olive-shaped cauteries, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him rest until he is healed
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the hair
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the small of the back due to coldness and dampness, and the patient has been treated with what we have mentioned in the division but is not cured, and the disease is chronic:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then you must purge the patient of thick humors using fetid pills or similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	Afterward apply a cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of the cautery is in two ways:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	namely, hot remedies together with fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery has many ways, one of which is this:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	such that you cauterize the small of the back with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and they should be deeply and widely made, and there should be the width of two fingers between each cautery, and the cauteries should be olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Sometimes one cauterizes in the middle upon the top of the small of the back, for which there are four cauteries according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you wish, cauterize it with the circular cautery which we have mentioned previously for the dislocation of the hip joint.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip joint, and all the spokes of the heart are burned
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain holds at the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it extends to the thigh and leg, apply two cauteries where the patient feels pain, and one cautery above the ankle on the left side
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cauteries be ellipsoidal, and let the thickness of the heart be burned.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that pain extends to two fingers' width from the foot or further, cauterize where they feel pain three times or four with a cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if necessary, do more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is felt below the knee towards the thigh, apply a cautery with an ellipsoidal or circular cautery, and take care in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery on too long so that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the whole leg was swollen, and the foot likewise, and it became perforated and corrupted completely.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a bellyache that resulted in death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, perform cautery on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise say in cauterizing hair, of which this is the method: make such iron and let it be at the head as thick as a hazelnut or somewhat less, and let it be perforated and let there be spaces between each perforation equal to the thickness of a hazelnut.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let the perforations be open at both ends, like nuts, and let there be many well-made iron pieces;
et c’est li forme:	This is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is entirely red-hot and then place it on the diseased scalp, turning it towards the sound side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and cauterize once with one cautery, and leave it three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	And then make an ointment of butter and let the wound remain open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasis says that we use this cautery little because of its great heat, and few see those who use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	And furthermore this is one of the good cauteries which he can withstand; and at the place where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	And the cauterizing iron for burning is such that you make an instrument with interlaced openings in which the edges of the door descend, and it should be of brass or iron on one flat side, and have two nuts at the top, each separated by the quantity of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and let them be turned over and open above, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	Then place the box of the poultice on the sick person lying on their healthy side, and press your hand firmly on top of the box.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then place between the two circles of the hot awl which has been heated in the fire for a little while, and let it sit there for an hour of time, and let the patient bear the heat and burning from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it finds biting like that of fire.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the blisters have passed, raise your hand with the instrument and lift the hair from the wound gently, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until what is blackened by the burn is gone.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	And leave it for three days until corruption comes out of it.
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this would be the final help after the treatment with ointments, as long as it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make another instrument like the one you used on the wound and increase it accordingly.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And this is the manner of the hot cautery, which I have written about in the treatment of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and live chalk, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and place them in nine pots.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small hole through which the point of a razor can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	And put another well-sealed pot over it and place quicklime and hot water and gentle heat on top until there are two fingers' width of powder when you press it in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And let it be thus until it descends with water and iron or lead, then take all that water and throw it onto heat and into alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	Then it will be very hot and administered in many works of medicine and cauteries on other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	But it performs the same work as fire, and has other medicines with which one may cauterize the hair well, such as treacle and myrobalan honey, heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was healed from the pain in his hair and sciatic vein. He praised it greatly, saying that no other treatment was needed, and the man was completely cured after just one application, as described below:
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And say in this way that you take fresh and dry green copper vitriol, grind it much with a spoonful of fat, place it on the hair, thigh, and leg where the pain resides, and let it sit;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then have him enter a bath until his body is somewhat warmed, and lay him in bed; then the pain will all go away and he will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a cautery with such medicines unless after an evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's gall, it helps much;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And the cautery must be applied in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen, anoint it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe of the foot and the one called the cuboid.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry goat hair, set it on fire until it becomes charcoal; then put it on wool and let it stay until it is extinguished.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do this again in the same way; do not stop doing this until you think it is time to reach the hair and the pain has stopped.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	This method of cautery is called "goat's cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or impact or from too great an evacuation, or from signs of spread cold matter, none of these signs warrant cauterization except for that which comes from infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	After the patient is emptied of fetid pills or similar substances, one should perform three rows of five cauteries or more on their back where the pain is located, depending on the strength and amount that the patient can tolerate.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	And the cauteries should be performed using a cautery called "the point".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	If you see fit, perform three or four cauteries on the middle clavicle according to this shape:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Frequently this disease affects young children; its beginning is marked by them having a narrow gait when they stand up, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	And you find in the lower spine of the back, near to the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this, if you wish to cure it, then cauterize with the clavicle cautery according to this form:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery may evenly burn each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see fit, cauterize around the spine with a cautery point that burns two or three lines deep, and let the points be close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Then heal the place until it is clean according to what we have said, and make sure you do not apply cautery on any gibbosity that is near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pain in the joints comes from moistures that are spread throughout each member of the body; and when pain comes into the feet, which doctors properly call 'podagra'; and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is treated with cauterization in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make many cauteries around the ankle joint, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary to prick the face of the foot, use the cautery called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains extend to the knees and other joints, which happens often, then make three or four cauteries on each knee, all olive-shaped.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you need more, then make them; but do not hold your hand far from it until the point of the knife is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are at the hands, then make prickings around the fist two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	If there remains no pain in the fingers, then make prickings on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains come up to the elbows or up to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and have good care of the patient and take medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	But if you provide good care and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	"on the rupture of the scrotum"
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When rupture comes to the anus, and the bowels descend to the hips which is recently happened, then it is necessary that when you see him cure, he should not eat that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	And that he use things that leave the stomach empty so that the feces descend from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	Afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his ankle until the bowels are replaced, and then move them to his thighs, and press firmly below the rupture onto the bone of the wrist, and there will be a sign like half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat the cautery whose shape is described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it becomes white and casts shadows.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bowels to their place
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the attendant shall keep his hand upon them so that they do not slip back
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and open the patient's thighs wide, place a cushion and two blankets beneath them, and another one on their chest to keep their hands warm
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, holding it with your right hand and pressing until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you feel the bone
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and be careful that the bowel does not slip out while performing the cautery
que tu ne le brulasses;	lest you burn it
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	or else the patient dies or suffers some other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And the cauteries for children must be thin according to their size, and those for adults large enough according to theirs
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, treat the wound from the cautery with butter until the burn is healed
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After treating other wounds until they are clean, let the patient lie on their back for 40 days until the wound is well healed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that his bindings be left on for a long time so that his bowels do not protrude when he gets up to go to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise, provide him with a well-made bandage and let him wear it for another 40 days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	And let him have good rest, working little and guarding against excessive consumption of drink and food, and against loud laughter.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall tell you after the cure of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Here is how to perform a laparotomy:
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When fistulas appear in other bellies and are known to be growing, if you see that they are not increasing any further, apply a cautery iron according to their size, and burn the third of the heart.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After treating according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the point of beginning and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and then cauterize with your hand in the middle at all points.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	"From ancient pain in a certain limb"
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	If pain comes to any limb, from falling or striking, and that pain persists for a long time, and medical treatments do not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'poins', and the cautery should be performed according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, strength, location of twists, and the nature of the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If it is without the first cautery, that's good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If not, then recommence another cautery on top of it, for it is customary that it must move to the limb that it is near, so you should make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	"Of dislocation"
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Some cases are sometimes helped by cautery with great benefit, especially those diseases that arise from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When cauterizing the eye, be careful if the disease is at its beginning; and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither descends nor remains, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on top of it
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	One at the nape of the neck, and another towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	And two on each horn, and one behind on the hairet;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	And leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	And cauterize the mouse according to what is written beforehand.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the swelling is widespread;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	And if it is clear that [the swelling] is present, then you should cauterize [the patient] with these cauteries that we have mentioned: one at the head, and one near the neck, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the breastbone and another nearby, and two on the shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	And two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nerves that are behind the heel bone, so that you do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And sometimes one cautery is made on the wrist bone, and another on the stomach bone, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more cauteries you make, the greater the benefit will be to the patient.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	Know this: the patient feels no pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find them described in the various forms of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After applying a poultice of vetch flour with honey, perform other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medications, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then apply cauteries to the limb according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	And let the cautery be a bit deep into the flesh of the heart;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with oils until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes cautery is applied to the hand, foot, and back at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	Yet let no one intervene who is not knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	de Albares
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called 'albaras' is inflamed, and the means of medicine do no good, then cauterize it with a deep cautery according to the quantity of the flesh of the heart until the inflammation is removed and its color changed;
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	Then apply a poultice of wheat flour, lentils, and rose oil mixed with plantain leaves, and donkey's blood and almond milk, each in equal parts.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And mix everything together, tie it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	Li cure de chancre par cautere est bonne chose et utile; quar quanque il est enveilli et eschauchié et dure longuement, il s’ensuit que la membre devient chee et que l’en est empeschie. Donc adonques le cauterise d’un cautere de fer ardant qui soit un pou entre en l’espés dou keur; puis ensi come li cautere est ostee, prent on une espice d’arsenic et de salemongier et les met ensemble, et fait on de la farine. Ensemble met on une partie de sanc dou chancre et une partie de sanc de chèvre ou de brebis, ou de sanc dou chevaulx ou de l’autel; puis prent on un peu de la farine d’arsenic et de salemongier et la mele a ces sanz et a oile roset. Et soit ceste medicine mise sus le chancre tant que li cautere y soit ostee et que li sanc dou chancre ne chei plus; puis fait on un emplestre de farine de fuces et de lentilles, de plantain et d’ache avec oile roset, et met on ceste medicina sur le chancre. Et quant il est tout gueris, adonques on l’envele et on mete y une medicine de vinaigre de vin blanc et de farine de fuces et de lentilles avec oile roset; et puis fait on une cautere plus petit que li autre, qui soit un pou entre en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure continue de la medicina de vinaigre et d’oile jusques a tant qu’il soit tout sanez.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it has stopped, then cauterize it with a hot iron that seems to resemble an ellipse, all around the circumference of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	Also, wise men said that one should perform cautery in the middle of the cancer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	But I do not think this is good advice, for I fear that it may cause ulceration and corruption, as it has happened before in some cases;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And a more correct thing to do is to perform circumcision-like cautery around it, as we have described in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	de l'enfleure qui ne peut meurer
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has an illness called "adubelati," which lingers due to the excess it produces or due to the weakness of the patient when they are very old (i.e., too elderly), and they have poor blood flow, or due to the time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	And you shall hasten its death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	Then cauterize it around with many small cauteries, pricking it.
aprés le laisse ensi.	After that, leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will rush to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Et se tu la ves percir à tot le cautère,
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand on the middle of that disease called 'adubelati' until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be so hot that the patient feels it like this: so that the course of the corruption is eased.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, as long as he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	"The treatment with fire by iron"
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than the destruction of limbs, for it consumes them like fire consumes dry logs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a place that can bear the cautery together with fire, then heat the cauteries of small and large nails according to what is needed for the place where the disease is located;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	Then cauterize it on all sides until you remove all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted may be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized places a poultice made with oil until the burns of the fire are healed, and all corruption is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of ointments generating heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days you see that healthy flesh does not grow, then it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	If not, then recommence the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this wound has sometimes been cured with hot medicine instead of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	But still, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the cure of hot medicine in its proper place.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	"Porrelz" refers to swellings or tumors. The phrase "des porrelz qui vienent as piez" means "swellings that come from the feet." Here's an example of how it might be used in a sentence:
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often there occurs at the feet a disease called "closure" according to our understanding, and it is a large broken thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are in two ways
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say fire cautery, and cautery of hot water
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is such that you heat the hair cauterizer like an owl's feather, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can encompass the nail on all sides, and have subtle edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After placing it hot on the nail, twist your hand all around the nail until it reaches the base of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	And leave it like that for 3 days until it begins to discharge pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be extracted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then anoint the location with healing ointment until it is clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are inverted by force against the body, which happens often in hands and feet, then you must bring a cautery of hot water.
et est en teil maniere:	And it is done in this manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a tin or iron pipe, or an owl's feather, and place it on the nail and the surrounding skin, that is to say, warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And place the vessel on so that it grips all around, then put a bit of warm water inside, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the vessel reaches the root of the nail, and can find the deep warm water pathway to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	And let the patient endure a little the biting of the hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then leave it thus, and it will be pulled out entirely by all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Do this one after another until you have rooted out all those on the body, then treat them with healing ointments that bring forth flesh.
li cure dou trembler	Here is a remedy for the trembling:
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other, then you must make them four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine;
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	And one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	This will stop the trembling, and the warmth of health will chase away the cold disease.
des pustules puans	Stinking pimples
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes it is apparent on the body's surface when there are wet ulcers or foul pustules which come from corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	When they first appear, it is necessary to make a cautery on each head of the boil;
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	A subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, whose point has been heated in fire, or of long Aristologus root, or of the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow back afterwards; but the excess from which they come is dried up, and they are sound.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood
quant li artere est copee	When an artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from behind, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is very difficult to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And furthermore, when this happens to anyone, quickly place your index finger on the vein wound and press firmly until the blood quiets under your finger and no more drops come out
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then put olive oil cauteries of various sizes, both small and large, into the fire until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then take one, whether large or small according to the wound and where the artery is situated, and place the cautery on that vein while you hold your finger [or forceps], and hold it until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And continue doing this one after another until the bleeding has stopped;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	Be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and ensure that no other harm comes to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be easily stopped, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned;
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	Either by cautery, or by extracting it if not already treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to stop bleeding;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And let it be bound and compressed properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	And do not think that stopping bleeding will be brought about by binding too tightly with bandages or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, for it profits little if at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a physician or medication present, then he should place his right index finger on the vein wound as we have said, stretching it out well until it is tense over the wound and the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	And do not move your finger, but moisten it with cold water often enough so that it is very cold until the blood congeals, thickens and becomes tense.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And make preparations ahead of time for those who need cauteries and medications.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of remedies for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which a fire cautery or burning medicine is necessary, and the ointments, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	I have placed this chapter from head to foot in the previous one, and I will follow the same path in this chapter so that one may find more easily what one desires.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And before I begin this one, dear friend, you must know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	Where there is doubt and fear, many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come seeking treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	If some come from those who harm themselves so much with their illness that they die easily because of the madness that comes from it and the greatness of their wickedness;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And one should fear these things.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And there are those who give you their sense and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am healed.
et li maladie est despitouse.	And the disease is stubborn.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater care in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely for those from whom you are certain, and for whom you can take glory.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	And use prognosis and indication in treating your patients so that salvation may be achieved;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	This will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	"Dear son, our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen."
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	"And I have arranged this chapter for you in sections, divided into chapters according to what is before the chapter on cauterization, which I previously discussed from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you need."
dou chief plein d’aigue	"head full of water"
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often comes to children during childbirth, especially when the birth canal squeezes the head of the child too tightly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	And sometimes this occurs due to a hidden cause that remains unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	I have never seen this disease affect anyone but children, and all those I saw died quickly.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And therefore it seems to me that I should leave off working on such cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and it grew bigger every day until he could no longer hold it up.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	And the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture collected under the bone above the nape of the neck, between the heart and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	And if this moisture is located between the heart and the bone, with small abscesses present, you should make a wide cut in the middle of the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And here is the shape of the spina bifida:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	"If the moisture has grown more and the swelling is larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:"
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see signs such as the head's scalp raised on both sides, and water squirts out when pressed with your hand inside, but nothing comes out:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If you must cut around the head, make three incisions as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After straining the wounds with cloths and powders, apply vinegar and oil, leaving it thus until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then unbind it, and dress the wound with compresses and ointments, keeping the head wrapped evenly. Give the patient dry food from a moist-free pot until the limb is healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is to observe where the abscess appears large and its assembly of water;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for sometimes it is in front.
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes behind;
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes on the right
et aucune fois en senestre.	and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut where the abscess appears and where the water collects, according to your ability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be sure not to cut the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Lest the patient die from blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	"de reume" translates to "of urine".
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	"When someone has an illness called 'catarra' in the ears or in the anus, and the illness is chronic, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with the cutting of the two arteries."
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is therefore necessary, when you cover the eyes, that the patient turns his head back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	afterward rub the place with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then wrap the patient's neck tightly in the cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the vein lies, and its location is near both ears, with few being behind them.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then mark the locations of the ears, then cut both with a sharp spathule of two parts until the vein is cut to the bone, and this should be done near the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	"And if you see that you have not cut deep enough, slide the scalpel under the artery and cut it from above, cutting horizontally about two fingers wide."
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	"Once the vein is cut, blood flows out continuously."
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the arteries do not appear upon feeling, then measure the distance of three fingers' width, then mark and cut until you reach the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and the amount of blood that should be let out is six ounces, and sometimes a little more or less, depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains on the bony point of the hip, if swelling prevents abscesses from appearing, then press the wound and bind it, applying ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	"de emigraine" translates to "of migraine".
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	"When chronic migraine comes with severe catarrh, accompanied by moisture in the tears and heat in the temples, along with long-standing frenzy and similar symptoms, and medicinal treatment does not help, then we should cut the arteries of the temples and perform cauterization as described earlier."
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of extracting them is thus: let the patient raise the hairs on their temples and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it beats well and is rarely heard outside except in some men who are too cold
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is heard, then the patient should tie their neck with some cloths, then rub the place with an abrasive cloth and raise the place with warm water until the artery appears plainly
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the speculum made from this form
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then carefully scrape away the skin until you reach the artery, then grasp it with forceps and pull it upwards, cutting it well from the tissues beneath each part
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is slender, then twist it with the point of the nail clipper; afterward cut off that portion according to the quantity of two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	If it is not cut, blood will not flow freely throughout.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw out six drops [of blood], up to three at a time;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread so that putrefaction does not come before the wound heals and bleeding stops.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at that very moment, and then, if you wish, cauterize with a hot cautery knife until the bone is exposed.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is the major work, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cautery helps to finish off moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	So it is of greater help in moist conditions.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the space with old cotton and place well-made tents upon them;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are dislocated, they should be treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with bandages, until they are healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the skin of the artery is torn as often as you work there, hurry to cover it with a cautery, or use the place of vitriol and press your hand so that the blood is staunched.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	And if you do not have vitriol present, place your thumb on the location until the blood congeals, then rinse the location with cold water until the bleeding stops, and apply pressure as needed.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And those who are skilled and lighter in extracting the artery should cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but let the cuts be well-spaced to retain heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the tools are too thin, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there should be one thick nail of space between the two knives, and then when you have marked the two locations with incisions, place the red-hot iron upon them until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	And let the two shoulder blades be kept apart, for they are not completely suited to this cautery.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes descend into the veins that are above the forehead on the head, and there is no benefit from any medication applied there, and you see the patient's face become reddened, and they feel a throbbing in their forehead like tremors;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and the eyes are thin and moist such that the hairs of the eyelashes have fallen out, and the eyelids are heated and burned by the heat of the tears, thus this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called this 'treatment for contusion', and it is to be done thus: first, have the patient with this illness grow hairs on their forehead, then make three evenly spaced incisions along the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and let one of the incisions be as long as two finger widths across the forehead downwards until it reaches the nose, and the other two should be at either side above the eyelids, but beware of cutting the arteries that are situated on both sides above the eyelids;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And keep your hand away from the line of the lower jaw, let each cut be the size of three barley grains across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And prepare a sponge and many cloths to wipe away the blood, then insert the spatula two parts of which are shaped like this:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the first cut that is due down the temple to the second cut;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Then peel away all the skin that is between the two incisions up to the eyebrow bone above the eye, then do similarly from the middle cut to the other second cut, and then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then insert into the first incision an instrument called a "cautery knife", which is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other without being sharp; this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp side of the blade towards the flesh near the heart, and the blunt side towards the bone, and press until it reaches the middle groove.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to where the heart opens, then similarly do in the middle cut down to the other side;
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	then drain the blood evenly, and press the site for the collected blood.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	Then put a bandage of old cotton in each incision, and cover them with cloths moistened in wine, oil, and axle-grease, ensuring that no abscesses form.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	On the third day, loosen the bandages and apply abundant cold water compresses; then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Of the remedy for headaches
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	If the veins come with Cataract accustomed to appear, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weaken sight, and burnt papers;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	And hair falls out, and there is deep pain in the head with fever, and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Therefore know by these symptoms that those materials and that catarrh come only from many veins, and the cure for it is this:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should command the patient to raise their forehead, then make a large incision across the forehead, and another from ear to ear.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, going down to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves near the temples that move while chewing;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge; then open between the two lips of the wound and place cotton wool and linen strips.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	Then, tie wet cloths moistened in wine and oil upon it, and guard against hot abscesses.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When the bone is removed, then you must rub it until flesh begins to grow, and then treat it with drying agents that promote tissue growth.
En teil maniere:	In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take 2 parts of wheat flour and 4 parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And apply it to these wounds to promote tissue growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Chapter on the Stopping of Ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls into the ears is one of four things
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grains, or some kind of creature, or a piece of metal ore or similar thing like iron
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing things such as water and eye mucus and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When something like a stone or another object falls into the ear and does not fit or grow in it, place the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, then pour some drops of violet oil or sesame oil onto it, and then perform extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	And when it sneezes, cover its nostrils with a cloth or wool wick when the sneeze comes, and place around the ear
et estent l’oreille au desus.	And they lift up the ear.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Often fever comes from this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	And if fever does not come, he should perform extraction with fine forceps; here is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it bursts open with the forceps, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then perform extraction using a thin hook of small thickness;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if it does not come out with that, then make a reed of thin bronze and insert the tip of the reed into the hole in the ear with force, and plug what is around the reed with soft wax so that the vein cannot enter with the reed;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then draw out the fever strongly, for often fever comes as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	And if it does not come out in this way, then take some pitch like what is used for birds, and put some on an instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put some cotton around it;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the pitch onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw out the fever.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come out of all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before a hot abscess arrives and causes spasm;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	And the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient lie on their back, and draw out blood according to his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear at the level of the fat.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the cut be like a crescent moon until you reach the stone, then break it according to your strength and suck it out quickly with your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And continue treating him until he is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it's a stone that is inside and it is inflamed, then perform an extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it cannot come out, then administer the thin, subtle spatumile in this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And arrange incising of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this if you think that the stone is moist due to the moisture of the ear until you have broken it into many pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then extract with subtle tweezers and sugar, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, when water falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to perform sneezing several times and fill the ear with old cotton wool.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out by itself, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, then take many needles according to the length of your middle finger, thin and light, and heat them a little in the fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	And let the patient insert one or more of these needles into his ear, and stick out on the other side with its foot, then pierce another needle onto the one that is in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	And do not stop piercing needle into needle until all the water flows out, and thus it will all flow out.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you see, then take a reed, insert one end into the ear and wrap the other end in fire until the reed is well burnt.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then repeat with other reeds until all the water flows out, as we have said earlier about needles.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In extracting an insect, if it is small bodied, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the section on dissection.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	But if it's from a large body where one can feel it, then introduce the extraction of forceps.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	And this is the easiest thing to remove that exists in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In extracting worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in division and where treating distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must examine the ear in sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If no worms appear, use fine forceps to remove them, and if none are seen, then take the tube with the form as follows:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert its finest tip into the ear according to the amount of suffering experienced by the patient, then suck strongly through the entire tube;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the worms emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey and come out, then stuff cotton around the tube as I have said regarding stones;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they still do not come out as we have said, then introduce the distillations that the ancients have proven effective in killing worms, and you will find them discussed under treatments for distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And then drip your oils and medicines into the ear with all this equipment, of which there is the shape here as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And let it be made of silver or thin brass underneath with small holes, and above for dripping.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And for pressing inside the distillation, have an instrument made of well-made brass for this purpose, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around its tip carefully;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then pour your oil or juice, along with what you wish of your medicines, into the tube, and the tube should be in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then insert the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil has distilled out of the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And let the patient sense it inside, and let the distillation be a warmed flask over the fire before you drip it into the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	Ensure that it is not too cold, for then the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Chapter on the Stopping of Ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without any holes in their ears.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And the same is true for adults through injury to the ear, or flesh growing inside it, and these blockages sometimes occur deeply within the ear so that they cannot be seen.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	Sometimes there is a defect in the hole and it can be seen well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	Therefore, when one occurs deeply and cannot be seen, it is difficult to treat in many cases, and in the case where it can be seen, you should place the patient's ear towards the sun.
et regarde dedens:	And look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If you see the obstruction apparent, then proceed according to the method described here.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	Let it be pointed and sharp in front and behind, so that it does not cut into the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the obstruction is flesh growing or a growth in the ear itself, then use fine forceps to gently pluck it out until all of that flesh has been removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the wax is deeply embedded in the ear, take a fine, light razor and heat it slightly over fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you notice the operation from which the patient feels pain upon hearing it, pierce easily, and ensure that you do not harm the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then place in the ear a wick according to the width of the hole, and moist it with Egyptian oil.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a wick and moist it with rose water, then sprinkle ground glass powder upon it;
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear swelling up, then it is necessary to remove the wick and insert another one moistened in cerote which has been made with rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue treating it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is discharge of blood, take a sponge and wrap it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the discharge of blood which are found in treatises on distillations.
de la char des papieres	That is to say, "of the flesh of the papers"
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	These growths that come on paper from the eyes when they are moist and dry should be stretched out with forceps and pincers, and cut off with a spathula at their roots;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then place ground glass powder upon the wound.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if there is blood on the skin, then cauterize it with a small round cautery; after the incision, movement will be easier.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and often they return, for nothing remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Often there come upon the eyes things like hail in shape and hardness, and therefore this illness is called 'hail'; it is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The operations are as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Be aware if the 'hail' moves from side to side; this is easy to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Then make an incision of moderate size, gently scrape off each part, then grasp it with forceps and remove it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot remove it without piercing the paper a little, do not worry about harming the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the wound is large, join it with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, do not apply too much force, for the ointments will heal it soon and join flesh together.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if hailstones fall inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, grasp the hailstones with tweezers, and cut and press them from one side to the other.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if the paper moves away due to the incision, it matters not.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And once the hailstones are cut out, rinse the ear with saltwater, and treat the place where flesh joins until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the grease of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Euxinach is a grease that enters the threads of paper wicks and this happens more in children than in adults, causing great pain to their eyes. In the mornings, they have cataracts and cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And for this reason they lie on their faces constantly, and sleep thus, with their papers beneath their wet eyelashes so that the inflammation and appearance cover the exinatch which opens into the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press hard with your thumbs and feel the exit through them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of working is such that the patient places their head in your hand;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	Then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the exinatch from each part, then place it on top;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	And press with your two thumbs on either side so that the exinach is gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	Then make in the middle of the moisture with the sharp spatula a slit no wider than the wound made when letting blood;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	And cut through the skin so deep that you reach the exinach;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And in many cases exinach comes out of the slit like a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Extract then a whole piece of soft cloth between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to left and right until it is dispersed;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and ensure you do not touch the opening with your fingers lest you reach all the way to the eyeball and accidentally cut yourself.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the exit wound does not open at the beginning of the incision, gently widen it a little until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract as we have said, then wet cloths in warm water and put them on the wound, and bandage it tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are some men who crush bile and place it on top to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the burn until it is clean.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes to its head, then cauterize it with gentle emplasters until it is clean.
des poilz des papieres	Of the hairs of the skin
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs grow on the eyelids that are not natural to them and are entwined, they harm the eyes and cause diseases such as constant tearing and softening of the lids and cloudiness, leading to damage to the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And there are four ways to treat it:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	Either by burning cautery together with fire, or by hot medicine as described earlier in the chapter on cauteries, and it is done either by incising and stitching or by tweezers, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper of the eye towards your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If it is inverted, that's good
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	If not, then insert a needle along all the threads
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let this be near the edge of the paper where the hairs grow around these hairs, and draw the thread upwards along all the paper, and turn it towards the razor
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then cut in the part below the paper, below the hairs close by, with all the scalpels fitting, from the large ear down to the small
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then press on the paper with an iron, like a minting hammer, but be sure that the figure matches the quantity you see lifting up the paper that is divided into twelve parts.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if one needs to cut off a large amount of the paper according to how soft it has become
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	Then draw on all the spleen according to the two lines you have marked out, beginning from the large kidney stone up to the small one;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	And let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root; then place the cautery into one of the two corners of the heart, and burn it completely;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	Then join the two lips with a single stitch of an awl and fine thread; wipe away the blood, and wipe off any gluey substances on the eyebrows if you see fit to do so.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	And if not, pay it no mind; then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then heal the wound without stitches using dry and constricting substances; for paper adheres to the union of the wound and impedes it, but stitching is harmful (as the ancients say); this is done without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	And there is another manner:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And it is that you draw on the paper a figure similar to the shape of a myrtle leaf, as we have described, with three points spread out according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut those which are above the small squares evenly according to the form which is here
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you lack the power to hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread attached and insert it into the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and place one thread near the large tear, and the second thread near the small one, and bring together the threads evenly between your two fingers;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin where you have marked it, as we have described, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar softening ointments;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	And sometimes the hairs of the paper are curled.
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	Thus you must use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	But stitching in one way or another is more artistic.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of cankers is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and it is that you fold the paper and pierce it according to what I have said, and then make two cankers by art, and two subtle threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut off two heads of two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then join the two subtly on what is above the paper of the eye, and press the two cankers of the two parts firmly;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it thus for a few days, and the skin that is pressed will die and blacken and peel off until it falls away by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it takes too long, cut it with some force, then treat it until it is healed;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is closed and the paper lifted, hairs will no longer grow there;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the two splints you shall make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The procedure is as follows: take a fine needle, and thread through it one strand of soft silk.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then tie the heads together gently, with the length of the threads being a palm's length.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then take another fine silk thread briefly, and tie its ends together.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then have the patient place their head in your hand;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And stand in the sunlight so that the procedure is clearly visible; for it is a subtle and delicate procedure. Then insert the needle along the entire length at the root of the hair, pressing into the paper quickly until you draw it out naturally along the hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull the hair out until it reaches the needle's eye, and insert into the eye one or two or three hairs or more;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then draw your hand across until the hairs come out entirely on the paper with their natural growth.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the hair is plucked and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the hair at the bottom until all the threads that you have ordered are gone, so that the hair comes out entirely from the hole above and you can see it with your eyes.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then pluck out the hair and thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair grows back in its place and flesh forms on top.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are short, then accompany them with one long hair from the head, and lift it up with that one which you leave until it is lengthened and then raise it up.
de la porriture de l’oil	About the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes to the eye, there are two ways to treat it:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One is natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or cauterizing, or from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of the operation is that you cut this joint, separate its lips, and place linen tents within it, until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and thou shouldst not use in the treatment thereof things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if thou dost this, then returns the illness worse than it was before.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but there ought to be applied things softening, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and rosewater or saltwater and linseed boiled, and applications of diaculion melted in some oil, and it should be wrapped with a linen cloth, and the treatment thereof.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the aim of thy treatment is that thou shouldst take care that it does not heal according to its former shape.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And these operations which we have spoken of are but redressings of this disease, that it may not return according to its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	About flesh growing in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness that is below what is truly called "axacrati" is natural and accidental
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wound and cut and burn and things similar;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the way to perform this operation is that you take a needle with a doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, making it pierce from the left eyelid towards the right, so that the threads come out on both sides of the flesh.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then stretch the flesh above the entire needle and cut it with a broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should, that is good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	But if not, then take a razor and place it in the crease, turn the paper over, and make two cuts inside the paper along its edges.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	And let the ends of the two cuts be the two corners of the incision you have made, and form an angle such that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of the Greek letter 'I'.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	Then remove that piece of flesh according to the length and width of its edges from under the paper, then join together the two parted sides and sew them with a thread of wool.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then comes the care of those we have spoken about regarding mollifying medicines, and tents, until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a split or cut or burn, then you should make a full-length split under the pubic hairs, following what is written above;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then insert between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one should perform the procedure according to the shape of the disease, for it is very varied in shape; and wise masters arrange all their strength to make the form return to its natural state
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the procedure and tools in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	About the sudden tearing of the paper (i.e., the eyelid)
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this union happens in many men in such a way that the skin above is stuck with the white of an egg and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you should put the point of a razor under the skin and lift it up
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	And stretch them like tweezers, until you grasp what is suitable for the subtile spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer if the spatula is too sharp or blinds the eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	And make your cut, from which you scrape away that collection, lightly so that the paper returns according to its natural shape;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	And remove all of that collection, and sometimes apply salted water to the eye, then rinse with fresh water and collyrium;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	Then place a linen tampon between the paper and the eye, and apply wool moistened in egg albumen onto the eye;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And after the third day, apply cold compresses until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that a nail can be in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	Either it is nervous and similar to hard skin, or another that is not nervous but resembles moist gel, which when touched by iron and attempted to be grasped with tweezers, cannot be held.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	And both kinds begin near the great eyelid, growing gradually until they cover all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	Then the manner of incision is such that the patient places his head in your hand, then opens his eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	And lift the paper to your hand, then fold the corner like small tongs, and press it on top;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and insert a horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	And fold the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the corner, pushing it through completely with the needle, then tie the corner with thread and press it down, and scrape off all the hair on the side of the corner that covers the pupil and silk to the top of the hair, then cut the remaining at the root of the eyelid with a sharp scalpel and tweezers, leaving the natural flesh on the eyelid so that tears do not flow through the incision as usual;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	And sometimes the nail grows only on the little finger, and on the thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Then remove all the soft skin around this area; here is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And ensure that the spatula does not touch and tear the delicate tissue, and that the needle is not pierced;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	After the incision, pour some crushed celery seed into the wound, and make a plaster of litharge, and leave it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat this condition until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not painful and you cannot insert the needle, nor can tweezers enter, often this type of nail is cured by medications;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And they grow as I have described in the section above; if you observe them carefully, open the wound of the patient and gently take a little spatula according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And carefully raise the nail up; and if you see that it does not thin out and the root is pressed, then distill from your mouth into the wound a plaster made of litharge and red lead and crushed celery seed, and seal the wound until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then continue the other operation according to this same work until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing stands in your way with the eye, such as a hot abscess, then apply the cautery, first treating the hot abscess until it is clean, then resume the work as before until it is clean.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh from the eyelid causes harm to the eye with great damage, then suspend it with a needle and cut off a part, but not all, so that no tears come from it.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill into the eye red collyrium made of litharge
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	In some men's eyes, there sometimes grows red flesh which covers the pupil and sticks to the membranes, pushing them forward like a pomegranate seed.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the operation is this: the patient places his head in your hand, then you open his eyes and grasp all that red flesh with suitable hooks, and hold it firmly
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut off the first piece of flesh, and keep cutting until it is all removed, taking care not to injure the eye during the operation
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	And the incision of the eyelid should be made in the same way as the incision of the nail and the small ligaments from which bone is removed, as shown later in this chapter
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	And when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, apply to the eye crushed celery seeds or distill upon it red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines; then place on top a wisp of cotton with egg white so that it may be securely sealed against a hot abscess.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	And if anything remains and the wound begins to grow hot, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave off the eye treatment and cure the abscess with cool remedies.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your original task once it is healed, and thus do in any case where flesh has adhered to the eye by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But nevertheless you should relieve the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural course;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	And also according to any accidental course, in regard to iron work.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	Do not put your hand into any of these operations while you see that this limb is suffering from such treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Before veins are red which cover over the eye, causing their operation to be obscured and weakening the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is therefore necessary for you to first examine whether the eye, in which there is an abscess, is hot and if there is no other feverish illness besides the abscess;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Then tie it in such a way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Command the patient to place his head on your knee, then suspend those veins according to their wisdom, and let the bandages be doubled subtly according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And two onions per degree in a single course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then tie the bandages tightly, pressing gently on the veins, and squeeze out blood drop by drop until you see the veins swell beneath the skin.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	And be sure not to cut the eye with the points of the tweezers, and perform this procedure at midday before the sun, being very diligent in your work so that you do not let any blood flow other than from those veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, then distill into the eye a mixture of green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the stone.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot remove the stone completely in one sitting, then apply a plaster made of soothing substances to the eye until the pain is eased and an abscess forms. Then resume according to this method until the patient is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	And these are the forms of remedies:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	A surgeon calls a fistula 'arissati':
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you treat it with a cautery and with medicine that burns hotly according to what I have said before, and it is not yet healed, then there is deceit within it which you should cut upon the abscess where it must be burst, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then cut with all the instruments that are mentioned here in their proper form:
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And this is called 'sharp head', and should be made of hot iron from its head to its end, and be pointed like a chisel as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it on the location of the rotted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is scraped.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And do this several times, then apply medicinal remedies that dry up (the wound).
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the place is sound and flesh is born there, and the body of the bow is sound, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not renew nor become inflamed, and no evil happens to it, know that it is healthy.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nostril according to this method:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And it is that you uncover the bone with iron a second time, and with hot medicines; and when it is uncovered take iron forceps in this shape, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and thin out the handle up to its end as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and keep your hand away from the eye socket; then turn the forceps entirely until it pierces the bone, which the patient will feel because the wind will hiss if they hold their hand over their nostril
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place with dry medicines as I have taught you; and when the flesh has grown and the joints have hardened, then it will go to snow.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	So it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When both eyes open fully and evenly, and nothing obstructs or diminishes them, then you must bind the patient;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then heat [the patient], then place cupping glasses or leeches without cutting to suck; then put on the eye a poultice made of aloe and frankincense and sarcocolle, and then close the eye, and cover it with bandages and cloth.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	And the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths and fold each one into four layers, then place them one on top of another according to how much the eyes need.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then secure it tightly with a hard bandage from above and then recommence the cupping glasses to suck without cutting;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the cupping glasses and keep the eye constrained day and night. If the ligature loosens, then you must pull it out.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the ligature after the day and night, and if you see the eye improving, that is good.
se ce non;	If not,
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then resume the emplastrum and dressings and ligature and cupping glasses until it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of a burst eyeball
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	If disruption comes to the eyeball wound, then it opens, and blood flows from the paper like a grain of resin, which is frightening to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you see it close, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below up to that above, then insert another needle where there is the doubled thread of the eyelid.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and pierce it with this, leaving the first needle in its position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then tie the doubled thread at a suitable location and bind one part of the eyeball around it tightly. Then remove the needle and place a damp linen cloth soaked in egg white over the eye.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Allow it until the thread falls out with the boil, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And sometimes the wound is held closed by the boil on each side of a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye appears swollen, then pierce it with a fine needle that comes from deep within the eye, and draws out the moist albuginous humor and causes the eye to descend, entering therein quickly.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eyelid
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This condition called 'alcunnati' is nothing but bowed moisture assembled in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	To observe the appearance of this condition, make the patient sit on a prepared and upright seat, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the bowing rise up to your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	Then it should be inserted, without descending, and the light should be removed; let the patient see as he used to.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the bowel is not arranged as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and pierce through the corneal tissue one or two fingers along the length of the conjunctiva with the cornea and crown until the bowel exits.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And once it has exited, distill hot water mixed with honey or boil fennel seeds in water and honey, then cleanse it with another dressing until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Aigues of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have shown the similitudes of acute conditions in the division, and those that should be pierced;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if you work according to the health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and tightly bind the sound eye.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eye is left, or on your right hand if it is right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if the eye is right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the point of the instrument near the crown where it is about the thickness of a ray on the eyelid at the side closest to the lesser eyelash, then gently push the instrument called 'almagda', turning your hand until it pierces into the eyelid and you feel that almagda reaches the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	And ensure that the measurement of the path of 'almagda' is equal to the length from the measurement of the space between the pupil and the end of the blackness.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of the eye.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	If you see the bone through this paper due to the clarity of the corneal cloth, then place the instrument up to where the water is, and then express it along one vein after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If water descends now, then the patient sees before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting for a moment, if the water rises up the second vein, then apply pressure with the instrument; and when it is inserted deeply and it does not rise, then gently extract the almagda while rotating your hand little by little.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	Then put back in water a drop of this precious stone, and rinse out the eye with it inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place a plug made of wool soaked in rose oil and egg yolk over the eye, securing it with healthy eye ointment.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Nowadays, we put crushed cumin on wounds with plenty of egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then carefully pierce only the conjunctiva, not too deeply but rather gently and delicately; insert the almagda as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	And when the operation is complete, prepare a comfortable resting place for the patient on his back in a dark room.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	And keep him still from all movements; let him eat light foods and not move his head either to the right or left, and have him bound according to his condition for three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	Then he unties him in that same dark house, and tests his sight, and makes him see some things, and then puts the bandage back on for seven days.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	but you must not do this during the hour of treatment or after incision immediately, but you should lay him down, because water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	If an abscess begins to form, untie the bandage before the seventh day, and apply a poultice that alleviates abscesses
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is soothed, then uncover the sight and put on his face a piece of linen to cover for a few days, and keep him always in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then gradually leave the house little by little, and let him gradually return to his usual way of life.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no disciples should interfere in this case
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And someone came to us from Iraq who said that in some lands they make an instrument called almagda for piercing the eye, through which water is sucked out, but still I have never seen one in our land nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and by chance it may be a new thing
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the likenesses of Almagest forms, so that those who do not know them may see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and let them be made of pure silver
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	"And their fronts should have this same subtlety, and their backs should have three sharp angles."
de la char sor le neis	To remove flesh from the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes joints grow together unevenly, among which some resemble scorptions with many feet
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	And there are such that have flesh of yellowish color, and soft flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	Therefore, in those soft flesh which is not hard, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nostrils, and pour oil on that flesh, and rub it forcefully.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	for cut away everything that you can sustain with a sharp knife from one side until you know that all the flesh is removed
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains any part that cannot be cut away, then open it with all the delicate instruments lightly, so that nothing remains
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	And if blood overflows, or a boil breaks open, then cleanse it promptly as is necessary.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if they are malignant boils, then hurry and cauterize them until the blood is staunched and all the flesh is removed, then apply fresh lint and wine or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If new growth occurs, and moisture reaches the mouth, know that it is without disease;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if moisture does not permeate as it should, know that there is bone growing above the flesh, to which the instruments do not come for cutting:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Therefore you must insert a thick linen thread into it, moistened with our hands, and have between each knot at least one finger or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	And let the patient put his head on the thread's end with some force, and pull it out while smelling until it comes into the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	And many children do this at school, and it is easy for those who wish to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then grasp the head that comes through the snow with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart gently, as we do who are present.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the wound has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the threads, squeeze out the blood, and wet the thread in Egyptian oil, and replace it into the snow as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that remains of the flesh
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then place in the snow a hot poultice for some days until it is healed, and if dry medicines are needed, use them
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, in which one distills oils and medicines onto the snow
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it should be made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp like a tube, with its channel also
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full for purging the head
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let him have much of this to hold his head when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	To remove flesh from the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Frequently, a disease called 'telul' appears on the head and grows large, becoming visible to see.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And for this reason, you must cut it off at the beginning, and then remove all the skin, before applying a cautery or hot medicine.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	And if one delays cutting until it is large, then beware if it is hard, of dark color, and poor sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess; for when it is cut, great harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the abscess is soft to touch, not dark in color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then empty the patient and cut without fear, and afterwards treat with drying and tightening things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and bleeding
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know this: when water comes into one of these joints, it does little good, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, one must examine whether the wound is entirely fresh in all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then join the two lips to a stitch, then heal it until it is clean.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	And if the lips are already dry on both sides, you must scrape away all parts of their core until they are sound, then join the two lips together with a stitch, and bind them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder, and crushed incense upon it.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place on the powders a strong plaster or other adherent plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then heal it with ointment until it is sound.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of stitching is that you bring together the edges:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or by needles, as we have said in the abdominal stitching.
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or by thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	lipomas
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	There are many people who have hard abscesses within the lips, resembling grains of millet, some smaller and others larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Therefore you must turn back the lips, make an incision on each knot, grasp it with forceps and cut it into each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then apply powdered vitriol after the incision until the blood is stanched.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then the egg yolk, and heal the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	Of gum tissue
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Often there appears on the joined gums a growth called "albulus" by the ancients;
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	Therefore you should hold it with tongs and cut it at its root, allowing the blood to flow freely.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then apply powdered vitriol or other restricting and drying powders to the wound;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if that flesh returns after being cut, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	If it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	These are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of boils
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they appear gathered together at the head of the teeth inside the mouth between the gums, rough and sharp excrescences;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	And sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-green and wormy, causing corruption in the gums, and the teeth stink.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and their shoulders be within your grasp, raising the teeth or the edges until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And likewise remove blackness, greenness, yellowness and other stains until they are clean;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if one removes what is there due to the first cause, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not, then begin again on the second and third day until everything has been removed;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And know that teeth require various forms of instruments to remove them according to what the task demands, for those used to remove protruding teeth have different shapes than those used to remove teeth between others.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	When curing a toothache, one must delay extracting as long as possible, for this should not be done at all;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	For it is a very delicate structure until there is no excuse to extract.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is constrained due to toothache, you must be certain of the aching tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain leaves the patient, and they believe it is from the tooth of St. Denis, and have their good tooth pulled out;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and yet the pain does not leave because of this, so much that the bad one is removed, for we have already tried this with such sinners;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are certain about the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth all around with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	Then move it with your two fingers or with fine forceps bit by bit until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp it with the forceps;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And hold the patient's head between your knees, and keep it still so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these tools and insert it gently on each side, and with the lever, move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the tooth is pierced and hollowed out, then you must fill it with small wads of cloth where the hole is;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	And hold it gently with forceps so that it does not break when being pulled out.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	It is necessary to operate skillfully around the gum to extract a tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be sure that you do not break it, and if a piece remains, it will cause the patient greater pain from the root's wickedness than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that thou dost not do as foolish surgeons do, who through their haste and boldness sometimes break the cheekbone, and do not bring about what we have mentioned.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	But through their rashness they sometimes cause great diseases by the roots left behind or the cheekbone broken, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	And when the tooth is pulled, wash the area with wine, vinegar, and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	And if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the area
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	If that does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shape of the tooth-extraction tools with which one first moves teeth should be long-pointed and thick-handled, so they do not bend when pulling the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	And these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	"And they should be of thick members so that they do not bend during extraction, and they should be made of good iron and have teeth to hold the tooth in place."
de la racine des dens	"for the root of the teeth"
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains after extraction, you should place on the area cotton soaked in butter for one or two days until the area is softened, then insert the tongs called "algefri," with which the jaw resembles a parrot's beak.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	And they shall be made within as if with a file; this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if the roots will not come out with all these pliers, you should uncover the flesh entirely around the root and insert into it the instrument called 'althali', which is like a spatula. And this is its shape:"
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out by chance, that is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	But if not, then use all the tools whose forms are given hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	"And also help yourself with this instrument which has two rows, of which this is the shape:"
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	"and other iron instruments that are placed in front of the root of the teeth, and also help yourself with this instrument which resembles large pliers. And here is its shape:"
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let this tool be strong so that it cannot break, and know that many tooth tools are like this;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	And also other tools which are not enumerated;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the wise master shall find his own tool according to what his work and the illness show him, for there are such illnesses where no ancient tools were taught due to their diversity; and if one breaks a carriage or other bones where it could be used, then one seeks among the tools that are necessary, which I have told you about, and uses gestures, of which this is the shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone so that it does not escape but can grasp and remove it;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And then restore the joint with appropriate medications for this condition; if there is decay in the bone and it is small, scrape it away with all these tools.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When teeth appear not according to their natural course, and the form is ugly, especially in maiden women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is next after the one beside it and not in its proper place, and neither can be drawn nor smoothed.
adonques lou raie;	then remove it;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is close to the tooth, take this tool whose shape is depicted here, resembling a small beak of iron sharpened on its end.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	"And work little by little with your hands over several days to remove the tooth because of its hardness and so that you do not move the others. And if it is visible enough to be smoothed, then smooth it with a rasp like this one here, of which this is its shape:"
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and is also like the file used for making needles.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	And gently file the tooth a little each day until it falls out without moving too much.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then smooth the edge at the end with any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, it is necessary to file down its sharpness until it no longer hurts the tongue or impairs speech.
quant li dent lochent	"When teeth are loose:"
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front teeth are knocked out, either by an impact or a fall, and the patient cannot chew their food without it falling apart, even after treating them with constricting medicines, then that is of no use;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	then they should be secured with a gold wire, for silver becomes green and rotten, but gold does not change.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the wire be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you see that the teeth need to be straightened, then take the wire and the double-ended pliers between two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the loose teeth, if there is one or several, until you can barely see blood between the healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then start wrapping again up to where you began, and gently pull your hand tightly until it no longer moves.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then grasp the jaws of the file with some pliers, join them together, and place them between the healthy teeth, and position it so that it does not burn the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then let it remain thus tightly until it can stay, and if it loosens, or the files become round, tighten them with another file.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it remains thus, it will serve throughout its time, and this is the shape of teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when a tooth falls out, replace it in its place, gently, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And let no one who is not wise and patient meddle with this, and sometimes a tooth made from cow bone is used, placed in the space where there is a deficiency, and it is tightened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	"To cut the tie of the tongue:"
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this union comes naturally underneath the tongue at birth;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	In case of an accidental wound.
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	And the treatment is as follows: open the patient's mouth, hold their head steady in your hand, and raise their tongue.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Next, cut the frenulum of the tongue with a scalpel until the tongue is disconnected from its attachment. If there is scar tissue or a nodule present, which can occur due to an injury, insert the nail and cut it away.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	Ensure that the cut does not go too deep so as not to injure the artery located underneath.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	After performing this, lift up the jaw with warm rose water or warm vinegar, or cold water, then place a linen pad underneath the tongue.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	And have the patient rinse their mouth each night so that the wound does not adhere.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	If bleeding occurs, place powdered vitriol on the wound.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	And if the blood flows abundantly, cauterize it with a slow-acting cautery that is suitable for this purpose.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then treat another wound until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	And if you see a fleshy growth of black or hard color which the patient cannot feel, do not touch it, for it is cancer;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	And if it tends towards blenching and there is moisture, then apply the onion poultice, make an incision with a sharp lancet, and release it on both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if blood hinders your work, then apply powdered vitriol until it is staunched, then return to your task until all bleeding stops.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then raise the area with stitches and needle, and treat other wounds until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	"throat abscesses"
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes there are lumps that form in the throat which are called "godath," and these are properly known as tonsils. If you treat them according to what we have said previously but they do not heal, then be careful:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is a hard boil with little sensation and fleshy color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if they are red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron for fear of blood letting;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it be until it is ripe, and then you shall sever it, where it will break on its own;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of pale color round, and the root is slender, then have ready your instrument to cut, but first check if the boil is warmly resting and quiet.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit before the sun, and their limbs in your hand, and they open their mouth and take the servant's breath between their hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument, of which this is the form;
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	And it should be made of silver or fine brass like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	When you press the tongue with this instrument and see the boil, take the lancet and insert it into the navel, and draw it up more than you can bear;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	And take some things from the cloths with it, then cover it with the instrument, of which this is the form, that appears as force.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And moreover, the heads are curved, and one towards the other, and are very sharp, made of iron or steel
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take pincers, of which here is the form:"
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And let it be cutting on one side, and named on the other
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And after cutting one of the mandibles, cut the other in the same manner; then let the patient gargle with warm water and salt-water, and if blood flows, let the patient gargle with water or cooked pomegranate skins, or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the bleeding stops
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it until it is sound
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two mandibles; then cut them in the same way as the two mandibles are joined.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was close inside her throat, namely one of small size
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And indeed, I had nearly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not exhale due to the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if left thus for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had grown so large that it filled both openings of the throat.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I then quickly fetched a needle, inserted it into the woman's throat, and pierced through it with great force, cutting away a large portion of her windpipe.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then I closed another part of the wound with the needle and opened her mouth, pressing down on her tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After this, I pierced these abscesses with the needle and cut away some of it; only a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And thus the woman's throat passage was opened, and she began to drink water then wine; I continued cutting away at this abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscesses kept returning, filling up again the space I had cleared out until it became very large once more.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Then I bandaged it and burned with the cautery within the throat
ensi demora sens croistre;	Thus it remained without growing;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I left these parts, and I do not know what God did with him afterwards.
de l’uve	"de l’uve"
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When rheum descends to the eye, and it is inflamed and protuberant, it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is below, thick, and round, it is called "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, and you see that the surrounding swelling is appeased, and it is subtle, then you must cut it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is rounded together and is not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	if it is sanguine or of dark color or black, then you should avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to its manner of blennor and length, you should have the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument mentioned earlier;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the awl into the eye, draw it downwards, and cut with the first of two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of two testicles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you must not cut beyond what is naturally excessive;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cut more, it hurts the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of two testicles, until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of cutting, then you must use an instrument for the cauterization to make him fearless.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cautery is sharp and burning.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	It is necessary that the patient put his head in your lap, and then press the tongue with the instrument mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and cauterize with hot water so that it is neither too thick nor too thin;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and here is the shape of this instrument:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And at its top has a hollow where one puts the medicine, like the hollow of a spoon, and put the instrument over the whole eye with the medicine;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	And let the patient lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth away from the medicine inside, so it does not reach the throat.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye for half an hour's worth of time until you see it turn black and the pain from the medicine has ceased.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the eye socket until the cotton touches the eye.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry and fall off after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to restart the cauterization with the medicine, then do so, and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let him rise from cold water, and let him rinse with gargarisms until he is clean.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This remedy is safer than incision or cauterization;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and mugwort and similar herbs, gather them all or some into one pot, put ashes there, and let it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	And the pot should be well sealed with clay, and in the pot there should be an instrument for shaving like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be made of silver or brass, and one end put in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the canal until the eye is numbed;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	Afterwards, repeat often until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot boil, for many things could happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And do not apply cauterization heat except during the draining of an abscess boil.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put the tip of an egg into it so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	For the eggshell does not let the steam harm the mouth, and this is a good combined remedy.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Often a bone, fish spine, or any other object becomes lodged in the throat.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So then you must pull out what you can see, and press the tongue with the sunken instrument so that you may move the object.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	And what you cannot see and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	Perhaps then the object will be expelled through vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of apple, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	And tie the sponge with thread, then stitch it together.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	When it reaches its place, she will stand up, and then you pull fire.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not come by fire from what we have said, then take the lead instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be bent at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have its head raised high.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	Be sure not to touch the epiglottis, lest the patient choke, nor push the bone inside.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	And it is better for the patient themselves to insert the instrument, so that they know where the thing stands upright.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Then push it down until you draw fire evenly along the entire instrument, until it is fiery hot.
de la sansue de la gorge	**de la sansue de la gorge**
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Sometimes the sinew is healed, as I said in my previous work, through treatment with medications;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And if this does not help, then observe the throat of the patient in the sunlight, after pressing their tongue with the instrument I mentioned.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see a vein, then tie it with a very small thread, or use fine tweezers suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not help, then take a peeled cane and insert it into the patient's throat, then place the end of the cane into hot iron and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient sweats cold water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	Then take full handfuls of cold water, open the mouth, pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with your hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And as soon as the patient feels the water, they should lie down.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	If it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the same instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Repeat this many times, for it will fall without hesitation.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	The manner of fumigation is thus: take a pot with live coals inside, cover the pot with a pierced cloth in the middle, and place the head of the instrument into that hole;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then you throw your fumigation into it, and the patient places the head of the pipe in their mouth and closes their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but reaches the patient.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	And now the boil will fall, and if it does not, then repeat the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	And let the patient endure thirst, and eat salty foods also, but do not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And then it will be necessary for it to come out through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats sciatica is like this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps for entering into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	And it has the appearance of a bird's beak and sharpness like that of a rasp, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go.
et vez ci la forme:	Here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	"Chapter on Abscesses"
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many kinds of abscesses are described hereafter in this book, and they are differentiated by piercing and cutting.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	And there are two types [of abscesses]: one is similar to itself, and that which holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for those places where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the apostemes of the head are different from those of the fundament, and the apostemes of the fleshy part are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	But not all abscesses should be pierced until the boil has burst according to its fullness.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And there are some that must be pierced when they are ripe, even if they do not burst according to their fullness, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when apostemes come near joints, and one lets them be until they are completely rotten, sometimes the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	When an abscess is near the main limb, if you delay its opening until it becomes gangrenous, it will harm the main limb.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or if it is near the fundament, pierce it before it becomes gangrenous
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not necessary to pierce a hard abscess without prior digestion being completed, except for one near the fundament, which might otherwise penetrate deeply and become an internal fistula
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and thus cannot heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you should know the signs of opening a gangrenous abscess according to its development: when the pain stops, and fever subsides, and pain and redness decrease, and the swelling and hardness at the head of the abscess subside, along with other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you make the incision where the abscess hangs lowest and where it opens more easily
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the incision should be long enough for the body; and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints near arteries, make incisions equal in length wherever there are no folds.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In cases where they strike, follow according to this member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better that you delay perforating until it is confirmed to be digested completely, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before this, then the body will be filled with its venom, and it is full of much filth;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and perhaps it would harden the lips and the depth of it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you must bring small abscesses, small holes;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large holes, and many crevices according to the likeness of the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to strike with fire and cauterize;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when they have become like thatches, and are softened, then you must do likewise as one does for boils.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	And if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such that one cuts like the leaf of a mulberry tree, as abscesses of the angels;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those that have no head, like soft superficial abscesses, you must pierce them openly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And when an abscess is large and it has collected much bowels, and you pierce it, then do not draw out all the bowels at that hour, but draw out one part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	Then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more afterwards;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this repeatedly little by little until all the bowels come out.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Similarly if the patient is of weak strength, or a pregnant woman, or young children, or very elderly men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Because sometimes the spirit leaps with the release of the bowstring, causing the patient to die suddenly, without you noticing.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore, proceed with great caution in this chapter, and once you have pierced your abscess, then cleanse the wound, and see if the wound from the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	And if it is a deep incision, then bring linen or old cotton bandages;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	And if it is a large abscess and there are many perforations, then you must stuff each one with a bandage so that they come together.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	And if you have cut a piece of skin from the abscess, and you have shaved around it, then you must fill it with dry cotton or lint from linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove the bandage, and apply an ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your operation, apply cold water and gauze, wet the cloth, and press it on the wound repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the bleeding persists, apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned earlier in this book, especially during wintertime when the limbs or abscesses are very tense, then you should place hot wet cloths on them dipped in wine and oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it is summertime and the area is fleshy, then you must place wet cloths dipped in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then drain the abscess, clean it, and treat it until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this he must know universally in treatments of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	As I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, here is the chapter.
des soros	chapter on boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	**Where small boils come from the head**, they are like those we have in our skin, similar to the eggs of a goose, and there are many such similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and such where there is moisture like mud;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and some that are hard and stony in appearance, and there should be no doubt if the artery opposes it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting is that you test all tools called 'entromissoire', from which its form comes hereafter, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	But if it contains moisture, so let it flow through above for a long time.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, scrape away without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, because it returns immediately if anything is left.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then dip cotton in Egyptian oil if present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, then in water and salt, and use it to dress the wound, leaving it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And this will consume what is remaining of the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	Then recommence with cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know that none remains of the night;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the boil holds out fat, cut it according to this shape, along its length;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and cast your spices on it, and scrape it from all sides, and give all your care to draw out the clot that lies within it;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery opposes you, then do as I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And likewise do it for an abscess if it is hard, and with cutting and dressing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cutting into a hard and moist abscess is easier because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if some of these boils have no moisture at their head, or are those boils that I cut from the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the boil just like a hard, rough, and white stone, and could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if one had struck it, they would have inflicted upon it as much of a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other boils coming at the head, besides those that come at the heads of children and the roots of ears, the incision should always be made in the lowest position so that the bowels may more easily issue forth.
et les cure si com il covient.	And treat him as it ought to be.
des scrophules	"Regarding scrofula"
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur at the neck and under the armpits, and in angles, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, and intermingled with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each boil is properly within its coat, like the pustule and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And there are many kinds of these boils.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are also stubborn ones that refuse to heal.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	Among these, therefore, that which you see with good touch and is similar to the color of the skin, moves on each side and is not hard towards the nerves of the neck or the artery nor the vessel, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	Then you should cut it from above and scrape off each part; hold the two lips of the heart open if needed, as we have said for abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	And cut it bit by bit, and make sure you do not cut the nerve nor the vein; let the scalpel be neither dull nor sharp so that your hand does not slip, nor go too deep lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not bleed freely, then place powdered vitriol or some powders that stop bleeding in the wound, and press the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscess is pacified, and the wound begins to soften and decay.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the bleeding has stopped, then return to your work, completing it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then search with your finger for any small scabs that may remain, cut them off and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	But if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, do not cut that scab at its root, but rather tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it fall off without harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then fill the wound with Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton, then dress it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the entire scrophule, then it is necessary to bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them together now, since there is no longer any excess left due to the size of the scrophule.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If you must grasp the root of it and draw out fire, and stitch it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	The scabs that hold excess fluid, prick where they open more.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And pierce it as before mentioned, depending on it, then bring plaster with ointment and similar things so that it may corrupt what remains of the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is clean, apply an ointment that penetrates deeply into the flesh until it is completely healed.
de squinance	Here is a possible translation of "de squinance" into English:
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	But I never saw anyone in our land who performed it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with squints, the flap of the throat called "epiglottis" must be avoided;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	And one should not help by this means because all the veins and the membrane of the patient are hot in the mouth or throat or both.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat of the lung, it is necessary to close the epiglottis to escape the danger that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should do so below three circles or four, a small slit across between two circles or by the quantity of the slit of the thyroglossal duct, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And these places are so connected to the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh in them, and the vessels are long.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, he should stretch out the skin of the neck at its full length, then cut the throat until it reaches the windpipe;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then cut the hyoid bone as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	This is demonstrated by the cutting of the windpipe's channel that leaps out from the place that has been broken, and by the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound open for a short time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed of which strangling is doubted, join together the two lips of the wound in the heart and sew it up entirely without cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is sound.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be near death, and the breath is gone.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient can swallow again and breathe through the wound, thus preventing death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And therefore the ancients commanded that one should leave the wound open until the worst of the illness passes, and it passed in three days or four. And afterwards they commanded to sew up the wound and dress it until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a damsel take a knife and stab it into her throat, and cut some of the veins of the lung.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to heal her, but found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	"I uncovered the wound and found that the blood issuing from it had not cut any vein nor carried off the throat, but the windpipe issued forth through the wound."
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried and sewed the wound, and dressed it until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And nothing happened to the damsel except that her voice became hoarse, and later she returned to her usual self.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore I say do not fear cutting the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	"of the large throat"
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This type of abscess is called 'throat hernia', and it is a large abscess with the color of a chestnut, occurring often in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	And there are two ways about this:
naturez, et accidens;	of essence and accident.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or it has no natural faculty.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And accident is of two kinds: one resembles pus in some ways, and the other is like an abscess from an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there should be fear in both cases, but one must only operate with fire when it is small, and prove and search this throughout the entire intromission.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it like our pus and not attached to any vein, cut it off as we cut out pus; remove all of it if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Search everywhere around it, and treat it as needed until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	"of fatty tumors"
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many kinds of pus, all of which I will describe:
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now I must explain the difference between pus and discharge.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that discharge is hot and has fever as long as boiling does not pass, and corruption is complete;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Then, the fever and heat will cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	Without heat or fever or pain, the nut contains syrupac, which is its own juice and has the color of flesh. It starts like a jar and becomes large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And according to two similarities, it is either greasy or moist, with many colors as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	"When you come to the treatment of fatty tumors, first examine and explore with the instrument called the 'introitus', according to its form as described in the chapter that follows."
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of investigating boils is to take the moistest part you find in the boil and twist your fingers bit by bit until you know that the point has pierced the center, then continue according to the size of the boil.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the probe, taking care that nothing spills out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If there is running moisture in a boil of any color, cut it as I have said for other boils;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if no moisture comes after the probe, know that it is greasy. Then cut it in a cross and take it with pincers, lightly scraping each side and carefully peel off the skin where it lies to draw it out cleanly with the nut.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	But if anything remains, the illness will return many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if even a bit remains, and the blood grieves you, then apply to the wound some hot caustic powders, bind the wound, and put on things that soothe an abscess heat, and treat with other treatments until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the illness is great, then cut the two lips of the wound open, and treat those that go inward in flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	And if the vein beating is against you or otherwise, then hasten and apply ground vitriol to its place, let it lie for two or three days until the wound rots, and let the blood ebullition rest;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Then return to cutting those that remain of the boil.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Here are the shapes of intrusive instruments, and they come in three kinds
grans et moien et petit;	Great, medium, and small
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	And there are three squares called "albaret", one called "breb", and they come in three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Large, medium, and small to enclose the abscesses of fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like the needles used to stitch wounds, and are made of yellow brass, iron, or silver; those that are gold are more valuable, and they are especially praised for enclosing the curves of fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	And they come in three kinds
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Large, medium, and small according to the quantity of the width of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the needles are very similar, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	Large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	And there are also needles with two curves that come in three kinds
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	And there are needles with three curves, which also come in three kinds
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	And there are needles with two curves and needles with one curve only, both of which come in three kinds
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these tools are sharp-edged, and there are some that cut only from one side, which are used to scrape off bone in order not to sever the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And among these introducers are the alemeles that are kept in many hands so that the patient does not perceive them during the opening of abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	And they come in three types:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	Large, small, and medium-sized, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And use them only on bare skin, such as legs, arms, breasts, angles, and similar places.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	Sometimes another small tool, resembling the skin of an onion, is made according to this shape, with which one stops bleeding:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	"and it is placed sometimes at the location where veins and arteries have been cut, and sometimes they are made according to this large form:"
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Some men's breasts swell when they begin to be corrupted, making them appear like those of a woman.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	And remain unsightly and swollen; whoever wishes to treat them must do so according to this shape from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape away the fat, dress the wound with healing ointment inside, then bring together the two lips of the wound to stitch, and tend it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if the breast hangs down and is soft due to its size, like that of women, then cut it open at two places on top through two similar incisions.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	So that one holds onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form:.b. up to line.g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat. Dress it as we have said for stitching and powders, and do what is necessary in tending until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it does not heal, or the incision is not fully made because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let him chew on the remaining flesh and fat, then clean it until it is sanitary.
des apostemes des asselles	swellings of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These hard swellings that appear under the arms are types of scrofulous tumors with hard edges, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the boil is emptied out, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it overnight, then remove all the cotton and heal it with suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the swelling resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said in the section on scrofulous sores, and if the wound secretes pus, apply a cautery as we have said earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	of the bursting of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When an artery is cut and the skin above is sewn shut, abscesses often form; likewise when a vein bursts and there is an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	If it is known that it is for the artery, then the abscess will be long and deep;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	And when you feel it with your two fingers, it feels like a pulling sensation.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	When it is for the vein, then it appears red and swollen.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	And it's foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is located under the armpits and groin areas or near the neck and many other places; it will be very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore one must avoid cauterizing with fire; and the one who is at its head must also avoid it, as well as the one that is caused by inflammation of the artery that can be seen through the skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then perform an incision on the thighs, and carefully separate the artery from the tissue until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then place a needle underneath one side, and pierce it until it reaches the other side. Tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then insert an introjector into the space between the two ligatures until blood comes out from there, and let the abscess be opened.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then dress the wound every day until the ligation falls off.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then apply an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	If the abscess is caused by a vein incision, then you must hold what you can of it in your hand with forceps. Then place the needle underneath the spot you are holding and pierce it until it reaches the other side, so that you may draw out one double thread.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then tie the abscess, as I told you, with thread taken from one of its two parts on the skin.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	And if you doubt that the threads may break, then insert another needle through all of the threads beneath the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads at four points.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut away the abscess until the superfluity comes out; then cut away the excess from around the heart, leaving what is tied.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it; then apply dressings and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	"Apostumes of the nerves"
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, boils come to the artery and vein,
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this occurs more often on shoulders and toes, and in all places where there are joints; these are serious abscesses, their color resembling the color of flesh, and they exist in many forms without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is pressed strongly, the patient feels pain; but this is not deep within the body, rather near the heart.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	And it moves well on all sides, neither going forward nor backward, nor below nor above, and one that is in joints should not be covered with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	For fear of contraction occurring there;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And the one that is on the head or forehead, cut the skin at the temples.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, grasp it with tweezers and cut its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, suspend it with forceps, scrape it off, then cut and sew the wound together, caring for it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	"from hanging bags of fat"
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes occurs in bellies and nowhere else, called 'fungus' due to its appearance, with thin roots and large heads;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	And there are both small ones and very large ones.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else; they were white and had thin roots, and they were often cracked open with moisture flowing from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found one weighing XVIII ounces, the other VI. The procedure for incision is such that you should consider whether the patient is moist; the color of the artery is pale and moist with a subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If the cut is wide, have the cauterizing iron hot and ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For at cutting comes often too great a flow of blood; if the blood overcomes you, then hasten to use the cautery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision of iron, then take a well-made thread of tow, tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	Then tie it again; do not cease pulling on the thread of tow until it cuts through the artery without effort.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	And if the roots are large, one fears cutting even for the belly; but you can cut half of it and then cauterize so that it does not bleed again.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then heal the wound, but ensure you do not cover the telum which is of fox-like hue, poor sense, and produces milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	"For this is an enchanted aposteme, and I will speak of the cure of chancre later on."
quant li boude ist fuer	"When the belly is full"
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the wound comes from a cautery burn or a fissure of syphilis, and is located on the belly, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries as mentioned earlier, or from windiness
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is due to the rupture of syphilis and the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it causes little pain or discomfort with varied discharge.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an intestinal issue, then it becomes more diverse, and when pressed with two fingers it sinks in and then returns, and sometimes it becomes hard, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and with heavy labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it's due to moisture, it's not serious; when you press it with your hand, it yields well without being tense.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it's due to blood, then the abscess appears large and hard, adhering firmly like a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it's due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and its appearance can indicate whether it's from arterial or venous blood, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Therefore, you should leave the treatment alone.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Fear and doubt exist regarding this matter, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, concerning both artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or bowel, then you must command the patient to draw up their knee and extend it fully straight, then press firmly all around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then have them lie down constantly between your hands; then go around the place you marked with the entire palm of your hand, then stretch half of the abscess upwards with the full width of your index finger.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind it firmly with a strong thread or cord of strong silk, and let the swelling be released completely.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open half of the abscess stretched over the bandage, and insert your index finger, and search for the intestine
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it trapped by the bandage, untie it, and bring the intestine out from in front of the abdomen
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the bowel, grasp it with your index finger and cut away any excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery opposes you or the vein, then proceed gently around; then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and insert the two needles around what you have pierced in a cross shape
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then press the boil at four points over the needles; if you see, remove the needles and let it alone until it rots; and cut away the dead flesh.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Then cut it when it is ripe and ready; then treat it as necessary, and cut away the boil as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the spot as needed, and close it up.
dou chancre	chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the previous section about the kinds of chancres and how one must operate by medicines, and how to avoid surgical treatment.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	And let's discuss the chancre in the marrow, and caution must be taken in treating it; ancient authorities say that when a chancre is in a location where it can be shaved off completely, like those on the breast or hip, they should be removed entirely at the outset.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	But when it is large and old, do not attempt to approach it, for I have never seen anyone recover from it;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	No one has ever been healed from this before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the operation, when it is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you should purge the patient of black bile at least once;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	Then make the patient fast if he has shown signs ofpletion, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the operation;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then cut away your Oncines or Chancres, and shave the hair from all around it, and remove it completely without leaving anything behind;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and press firmly on the wound with your hand or some other thing, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein opposes you, cauterize it until the bleeding stops;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat him with another remedy until he is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already spoken in the previous section about the similarities of dropsy, how water collects in the body and the signs of each kind, as well as the remedies made by medicines and those treated with iron;
si est eclites soulement;	If it is merely bruised;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not use iron in these two cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	namely, tympanites and hiposarches, for they are deadly matters.
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore, when treating this type of dropsy called "eclites," if the treatment does not help and the patient is weak or has other illnesses such as dropsy, tumors, or similar conditions;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	then do not use iron, for there is doubt involved.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	And if you see that the patient has strong vitality, and they have no other illness besides dropsy alone, and are not too young nor too old, then you should proceed thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Have the patient lie down straight on your hands, and have an assistant press the abdomen strongly while pouring water onto the lowest part of the back, then take the spinehook shaped thus:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	with its point, but not so deeply that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor cause injury;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look if dropsy has entered towards the intestines
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary that you cut with a lancet three inches below and above on the shin bone.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if dropsy is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the shinbone three inches below.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to phlegm, then cut on the right side, and ensure that the patient does not lie upon the incision so that the excesses do not flow into that weak area.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce the skin with an awl and insert it, raise your hand to cut through the entire spermatic cord between the skin and the scrotum as in castration.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the scrotum until the spermatic cord reaches its proper place, and this is the opening for water, then draw it out and insert this instrument of which I have described.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a fine silver needle, made of brass or light copper, with a small hole at the end.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	And on one side there are three openings.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	And two on the other side, and one on the other.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes use to cut feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the top of it is the almond; so when the tool reaches the water, it sinks now upon the tool.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Therefore empty about half or one third of it; because if you empty more than is necessary at that time, perhaps the patient will die due to the release of his spirit from the weapon, or he may faint, or come close to death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	But empty according to the amount of its power, and according to what the indications of the patient's power signify, and his pulse.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then withdraw the tool and hold the water back; it is held back now by the heart, which stops up the hole that is above the stomach, as I have spoken of.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then restart the treatment the next day if you see the patient enduring this, and apply a small amount of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do this for several days, but be careful not to remain there too long, just a moment with a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient and leave too much water on them, their cure will be like that of the grave or hot sand; they will sweat excessively or take a bath in the sun; they should drink sparingly.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And apply drying medications until they are healthy again; cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the water, as I have mentioned earlier.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the swelling of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never are children born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or one that is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it must be, let it be pierced at once with a very fine lancet according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then place a subtle skin clip of lead there; tie it and hold it for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, remove the clip, let him do so, and then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And perhaps this is not necessary, because the urine that comes forth does not remain closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose hole is small shall be treated with lead ointment as we have said; it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those whose opening is not in its proper place are blind, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating until they lift their penis upwards;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and cannot void properly because matter cannot reach the bladder, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the method of treatment is that the patient should lie on their back, then raise the head of the penis and cut it like the shape of a feather's tip so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should be;
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and beware of excessive bleeding that often occurs there; if it happens, use something to stop the bleeding and heal the wound until it is clean.
des pustules de la verge	sores on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times these swellings come on the penis, which are ugly looking growths of flesh;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and some are malignant and others not.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	Therefore you should seize them with a delicate pincer, cut and cleanse them all, then apply moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, the treatment of anointing with ointment, until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the bath is malignant, of foul color and stinking, then you must bring cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have seized [the dislocation], and if the hip is above the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the hipbone that is inside first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and once it is removed, then treat what remains outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For if you treat them together, the head of the penis is not secure and may be pierced, and blackness and corruption come to its tip and in the scrotum;
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster of honey and flour mixed with the rind of pomegranates and figs, then treat it further until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cautery helps in two ways together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	namely, for the discharge of blood and for corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a lead tube into the channel of the penis, so that the patient can urinate through it;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when the skin is raised at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, whether due to wound or abscess, then you must cauterize it with a hair-removing instrument until the adhesion is loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	And if it is difficult to separate them, then you must cauterize with the spatumalium at some point near the head of the penis and the skin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then carefully separate them again, and place a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water between them to prevent them from sticking together again.
de la circoncision	de la circoncision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a continuous cleansing like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Nevertheless, when we perform this operation willingly and properly on children, it is necessary that we do the best work and cause the least harm.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For most masters and surgeons who perform circumcisions cut around the foreskin with forceps, using only one instrument.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If the heart fails because there are two valves, and by chance one above is cut and the other below remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or if it recovers, it feels doubled pain, and at the cleansing that comes from the removal of the bone, the point of the limb is not securely held.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and during the cleansing of the nail, the iron might escape and damage the work, and many times they grow such that they do not need cleansing, which I have seen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	As for the cleansing that is done with force on all the length of the thread, I have found its goodness through experimentation, for it cuts evenly both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand down evenly in one second.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but make sure the threads are tightly woven around the leather;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and that the way of the first work is such that you make the child understand, if he hears, that you are only tying the thread around the rod, and then let him try all the ways that he can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then hold it upright between your hands, and hide the cords between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them or any tools.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then place your hand on the root [of the dislocation] and blow towards the heart, drawing it upwards until the head of the shoulder is in.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then cleanse it well from the dirt that has gathered there; then bind the joint with a doubled thread, then bind it under the buttock with another binding.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it thus with the second band at the pouch and index finger of the hand, and cut between the two bands; then raise the heart quickly upwards and draw the head of the shoulder.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let flow the blood from buttock to buttock, for this is the cure.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on it and on the powder a bandage of a half of a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, mixed with good fresh rose oil; and leave it thus until the next day, and treat further until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The formula for preparing the plaster is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	Let the two halves be thin and sharp-pointed, and let the heads be likewise large and equal in size to a hazelnut:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of washing is when the heart fails during an incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore you must stretch it to your fingernail before the place forms an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And cut evenly; and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use tongs to cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they pass three days, and the area below the bone is swollen, let it be until the abscess is quieted, and scrape it gently.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	Then cut as much as you can move, and be careful around the bone; this will not harm anything at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore treat the place with powder for sudden wounds, as we have said when treating powders; and if you cut into the heart too much, and it goes upwards, then it will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	On the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or coagulation of blood, or bowels, or birth, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	And if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained because of a stone in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must bend over on his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	And have him place his feet on his back, extend his belly from the part above his back, and let the patient strain as much as he can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and thus the neck of the bladder is pressed for the expulsion of the stone above, so that the urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform an extraction with all the instruments called 'syringe', of which this is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it should be made of thin, light silver wire, like a bird's feather;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And the tube should be one and a half palms long, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method of extracting urine is that you take a doubled thread, and tie at its head a ball of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And remove the excess of the linen and place it up to the top of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and ashes of eggs, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and hot water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then gently place the syringe in the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the belly.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels that it has reached its destination. However, if this is not done correctly according to this procedure, it may be because the tube leading there is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch out the thread along with all the linen slowly and gently, and let the urine follow the linen, then remove it quickly, and direct the flow of urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When urine or blood enters the bladder and decay accumulates there, and you see water and medicine being distilled out of it, do this with all the instrument called "clepsydra," and its shape is:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, but has three perforations:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And the high place is raised so that the medical compress may fit tightly on the wound without needing additional padding, so that moisture can be drawn out and applied when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see your medicines going into the bladder, place the head of the catheter in the moisture and draw while squeezing what is inside.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	Then draw out the moisture from the catheter, and then strongly push the catheter back in;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	So the moisture will enter and go to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	And this is the form of the subtle enema used to irrigate the bladder.
si est ci:	Here it is
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	It is made of silver or brass, with the head higher up;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	And below has one seam where the ligature falls.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	Then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture you want to use to irrigate the bladder, then tie it between the two seams with a doubled thread, and heat one part of that moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then place the tip of the clyster in the rectum, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture arrives, until the patient feels that that moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make it into a circle, and pierce it evenly all around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then insert a strong thread through these holes, then gather the circle as one gathers a net, and put within it what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	"from the stone"
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already discussed in the chapter on stones their types and combined extraction methods;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I have spoken of the difference between kidney stones and bladder stones, all their signs, and in which stone one should operate by cutting.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder and in the rectum;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that stones which are inserted into the bladder happen more often to children, and this is a sign that water jumps from the bladder similarly to water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	And it opens widely, and the patient's penis becomes hard, and he pants many times, and then it becomes rigid;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	And many of these jumps cause foundation problems;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and is easy to treat in children until they are four years old, and is very severe in the elderly, and is moderate in young men, those who are between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And it is easier to treat those with large stones than those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to remove all the waste that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For sometimes it hinders searching for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and lay them down and move them below so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downward;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then seek and touch within [the dislocation].
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the space, then quickly cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall out on touching completely, then moisten your left-hand index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or moisturize your middle finger if the patient is mature.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	And insert it into its base, and seek out the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, guide it towards the neck of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then press with your finger, and push it to the outside where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the helper to press the bladder with their hand, and command the patient to extend their right hand upwards, and with their left hand remove the skin that is underneath the pubic hair in the area where the incision will be made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then insert the spatula like this:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make an incision between what is between the pubic hair and the buttocks, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And let it be right upon the stone, and your two hands always at the base, and hold the cutting edge so that it is wide on the surface, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	Perhaps the pressure from the hand at the base may cause it to slip without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	And know that there are such stones with angles and edges:
si est griés a issir;	It is difficult to remove them
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And some are smooth, like a glass marble, and round, from which the exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Therefore, for those with angles and edges, make your incision larger
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	And if it does not come out, then you must extract with forceps that are like a pair of tongs at the end, to move and extract the stone so that it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	Or you insert underneath it a fine, curved instrument at the tip
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	And if you cannot grab it this way, then widen the hole a little, and if blood oozes out, stop it with vitriol
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there is more than one stone, first place the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then burn the track, and then the smaller ones afterwards if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be done carefully, causing a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	When two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	Either he dies, or urine flows constantly where the wound cannot heal.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	But nevertheless, try to remove it with forceps, or extract it with tweezers, piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And once you have completed your task, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, then bind it, and place over it a wet cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to cool the hot abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Then cover the patient with his cloak, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you do untie it, wash the wound very well with oil and water, then dress it with balsam of Joppa and balsam of Basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if hot abscesses and corrosion appear in the wound, and clots of blood form in the bladder, causing urine retention that occurs in this manner without any pain with urination:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Then press your thumb on the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder and cause it to swell.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then wash the wound with water and wipe it clean with a cloth or bandage, and assist him in every way you know until he is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that all the times that you treat him, you bind his two thighs together and apply the medications on the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis and stuck within it, and urine cannot pass out
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	then the cure that I mentioned earlier, cutting him many times, is excused from cutting for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this to be so.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod according to this shape and having three prongs forged into one piece of charcoal:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then insert the probe gently into the penis until it reaches the stone
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the probe with your hand against the stone, little by little, until you can pierce through to the other side of the stone
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If urine comes quickly, then press your hand upon what remains of the stone inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it breaks soon, and jumps out with the urine, the patient is healed;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, then tie a thread underneath the stone and another above it; then make an incision in the penis at the stone's location between the two threads; then pull it out, untie the thread, and cleanse the wound with congealed blood.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and continue treating him until he is healed
de la piere des femmes	Of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It sometimes happens that a stone gets lodged inside women, and if it does happen occasionally, its treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second reason is that one cannot find a skilled woman who can uncover herself for physicians, especially if she is modest.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a skilled woman in this field of medicine;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth manner is such that the stone of the woman is more profound than that of the man; therefore it must be cut deeper and there is great fear involved. And if you advise them to do this, then you must take a knowledgeable doctor with little experience, and if you cannot find one, search diligently for a skilled surgeon
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And present to him a wise woman who understands the lives of women or a woman who knows some part of this art, and instruct her to perform what you command regarding the examination of the stone
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and examine very carefully whether the woman is a virgin
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	Then she must put her finger into the fundament and search for the stone
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And if she finds it, she should press down on it with her finger and instruct the patient to lie on their back, then insert her finger into the vagina and seek and press firmly with her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then she must move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches below the root of the thigh
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	Then strike upon the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, where it moves and appears distorted; feel the stone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	And do not move his toe above or below the stone; let the cut be small at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	Then insert the probe into the cut; if you feel the stone, widen the wound until the stone can exit forcefully; know that there are many kinds of stones.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 namely: small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know their appearances to recognize the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if blood is abundant, then put powdered vitriol in the wound; hold it there for an hour until the blood stops flowing.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	Then return to your work until the stone is expelled; have tools ready that I told you about for extracting stones from men to help you in your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	And if blood flows abundantly, and this is due to an artery being cut, then place powder on the wound; press it with bandages and cloths; do not resume cutting again; leave the stone alone and do not attempt to remove it, lest the patient die.
puis cure la plaie.	Then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And once the heat of the blood is subdued and the spot is healed, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	Here's a possible translation of the given Old French text into modern English:
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	A white substance is called ramice aquouse that is located under the liver of hens, which contains the egg;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and is called 'saffron,' and sometimes it is properly found in the membrane of the egg, so that one might think it to be another egg;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And it is the skin of the hen between the white saffron we have mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	There would not be any if not.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this hernia occurs due to weakness in the testicles, with the matter being spread out and expanding
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	Sometimes it comes from striking hens, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	Either it is colored declining towards yellow, or it is red without, black, white, aqueous and watery, and other things happen;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to know this assembly: for if it is in the white saffron we have mentioned, then the abscess will be round and long like the shape of an egg, and it will not burst open because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in its own lining, then the abscess is ripe with part of an egg, and therefore it is believed that this is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	And if the moisture is between the skin and the flesh, then one can sense it well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test the entire instrument with square openings, as its shape is shown here.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Therefore, based on what comes out after using the instrument, you can make a judgment about what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cauterize it with iron, then the patient must be strengthened according to his ability and the fullness of his body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Then have him lie on his back on something slightly raised, and place many blankets underneath him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the cautery iron towards one of the two ribs near the heart of the lung.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula and make an incision in the skin of the lung near where the long muscle joins the chest wall, ensuring that the cut is straight and reaches down to the white flesh of the lung. Then strip it thinly according to your ability;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the bladder full of water with a large opening, and remove all the water, and then place your bandages, and let the bladder remain above.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	And do not touch the heart of the kidneys, but only the bladder itself.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Remove it all or in pieces yourself carefully, so that if you do not cut it well, water will return
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the egg jumps out during your work, put it back in its place once you have finished the task with the bladder
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then sew together the two layers of the kidney's heart using stitches, then heal it as you would other wounds until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then tie up the vessels that suspend it, preventing blood flow.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut the kidney along with all its suspensions, remove the egg, and heal it as we have said
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And know that if water is gathered into two parts together, they are both branches.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	If you cut the other part just as you did the first one evenly, then wipe away the blood, and put moist lint soaked in rose oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And put another piece of moist lint soaked in wine and oil on top of the two wounds, then place doubled cloths over them, and tie it all together according to this method:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, fill them with lint according to this shape and sew them together at the waistband of the breeches, one should cover the buttocks up to the back, and the other should cover the elbow area.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	And the other two ends should be tied together over the two angles, and all the restraints should be gathered together at the loop of the breeches.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And sometimes this dressing is used instead of iron branding, and you should take one scalpel, carefully cut the skin around the wounds, heat it as we have said, so that the white surface which contains water is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Take the cautery according to this form, pierce the skin thusly once, then scrape it with this subtle hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cut in every way you can until you remove everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and make sure the fire does not touch the eye;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	Know that this operation is safer.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	Move cautiously to avoid bleeding and close the incision.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything goes wrong, such as an abscess forming or bleeding occurring or any other issue, treat it according to what is written above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and unwilling to undergo this procedure due to its horrifying nature, perform a perforation as I instruct you. When you are certain that the patient has lain down on his left side according to the signs we have described, make him sit upright on a raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	Then pierce the abscess at its lowest point near the entire scrotum and insert the hot iron of the cautery into the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	And let the opening be wide enough so that all the water runs freely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then place cotton on the wound, tie it, and let the rest of the water flow out; then treat it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the white cloth does not let water flow out of the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat water from dropsies, the shape of which is shown here.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And widen the wound's opening, and know that when water returns and gathers again after six months or so, then it will be assembled as before; and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	"wound of the birthing canal"
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in cutting this artery there is danger and many difficulties, which is why it seems to me better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	I will tell you the work and the similar things about an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say therefore that many abscesses come to be in the body, especially in the thighs.
et c’est par mout de cas.	And it often happens.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known to happen due to acute acidity and heat, which spreads to the joints or occurs due to impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And the color of the abscess matches the skin color;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And there is no pain felt, yet it is a serious abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	Sometimes an abscess may be pale and purple, and have a foul smell, and sometimes it comes from near an artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is near an artery, it is recognized by the hot appearance of the abscess when pressed with two fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is caused by swelling of a vein is recognized by its appearance when touched with two fingers, and one can also perform the incision on this type of abscess, as well as others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	And you should cut the skin of the joints, then stretch it upwards, and the egg-white-colored tissue should be delivered from all around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already hard-boiled with these new roots, then you must draw out the egg, and remove the shell.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is air-filled in the syringe or those inside the vessels, then you must release all that tension, and cut around neatly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	"And if the birth of the flesh is behind the joint, then you should cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said."
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when your work is complete, dress the wound with oil and wine-soaked wool, then apply other dressings until it is healed."
de l’aposteme des coions	"wound of the birthing canal"
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess enclosed in an enclosure resembling the testicle, with softening of the joints, and the patient cries out in pain when he walks.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this disease is also as dangerous as the one mentioned earlier, yet we will tell you its workings according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then place the suspension device for the testicles below your hands, near all the vessels close to the penis, and hold them gently but firmly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut sharply and wide with the scalpel across the vessels until they are exposed, and then strip from each side as we have described in the extraction of arteries in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then he inserts a needle where there is double thread, and ties it to the first place where the wound appeared, and ties it again at the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut the threads evenly in the middle according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then dress the wound as one would for other injuries caused by a blow, so that no vessel may fall out of its place.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For this reason, there is no harm done, and if blood comes from all the vessels, then one must draw out the threads from all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the bone does not lose its nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot help each other.
de la routure dou syfac	"on the rupture of the scrotum"
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The outcome of this procedure is the opening that comes from the groin or the extension on the abdomen in the region of the hips, through which the intestines descend towards one of the threads.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this opening is found either at the groin or from the extension of it, and these two ways come from many causes
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	From blows, from falls, from throwing oneself down, from lifting heavy weights, and similar causes.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the sign when it is due to stretching of the hip joint is that it happens gradually, over a long period, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The abscesses are even up to the depth because the hip pushes on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	"And the sign of this rupture is that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there is uneven swelling under the skin near the scrotum, due to the exit of the intestines from the body through the opening in the scrotum."
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	"Sometimes the testicles also descend with the intestines and become trapped there, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed upon."
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	"And in such cases where there is fear of injury from iron, one must avoid using it."
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of treatment is that you instruct the patient to insert their hand into the wound and push back the intestines if possible.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then press firmly on his neck with your hands and lift up the thighs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then raise the heart above them and cut away all the long sinews of the hips.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then insert hooks into the sides of the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and make them wide enough for the bladder to come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then strip off the hip joint that is beneath the long sinews of the hips until all sides of the white hard bone are exposed.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then place your two index fingers into that which instructs the loin, that which is between the first lumbar vertebra below the skin of the kidney and between the second lumbar vertebra, and separate what is behind the kidney and between the second lumbar vertebra.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	And then move your right hand inside the kidneys' heart, and stretch the lumbar vertebra upwards with your left hand, and lift the kidney towards the lumbar vertebrae at the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And instruct the assistant to extend the kidney upwards, and loosen that which is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And seek with your two hands if there is any intestine wrapped around or hard lumbar vertebra, and if you find anything, put it back into the abdomen below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle with a large thread made of silk, and insert it into the rear part of the lumbar vertebra, which is behind the kidney's skin.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After the waist, then cut the heads that appear from the threads, until there are four threads remaining.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then they put them together one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie it with sinew, which we have discussed earlier, being underneath the skin of the thighs, with a strong thread of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the heads of the thighs and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, lest any abscess come there.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And then place the second tie according to the first one, two fingers away from it. After these two ties, leave some sinew that is under the skin of the thighs for a finger's length.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	And after everything else, shape it according to the roundness that an egg has.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	Then cut into the part that is under the skin of the thighs until blood flows and the bowels, as we have said earlier
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then prepare wool moistened in oil, place it on wounds, and bring the tie that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	"And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize the white fibrous tunic of the scrotum that we have mentioned after the incision, in case of excessive bleeding."
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happened many times, leaving the ligature to fall through itself.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it is delayed in falling, let it be raised with warm water, and place upon it what we have said until it falls.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with another remedy until it is perfectly sound.
de hernie carnouse	Here's a possible translation of the given Old French text into modern English:
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch of medicine, I never saw anyone daring to treat by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done like the branch which is bound around the wrist, tying the vessels lightly after the incision below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut through it in the middle, and heal the abscess with what opens until the vessels fall out;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal it as we have said until it is sound.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the angles, as we have said, exposing the place;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and no intestines descend to the corners, and if any do, it is little, and repair them all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And yet if it remains too long in this place, the wound becomes large or inflamed until the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens due to the stretching of the sinew which is at the joints, as we have said, for it becomes stretched, then softened and swollen the place and opened.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	And its treatment is by cautery, as we have previously stated;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	Sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	And the patient lies on their back between your hands, then cut the swollen place of the rupture three finger-breadths wide;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	Then extract the sinew that is under the skin where it was cut, then take a thread and place it over the exposed surface of the sinew;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press it at the depth of the abdomen, then sew up the two exposed surfaces of the sinew over the head of the thread, and sew both one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the head of the thread, and do not cut into the sinew nor stretch it further, as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal prolapse;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then treat it with wound care.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When you cut threads, cleanse it and dress the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	"Gangrene is constrained and does not appear in the rupture; cauterization is milder in this site and closer to healing."
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	Regarding the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Often the skin of the thighs becomes softened in some men because the flesh inside is softened, and it is easy to see.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and when you wish to treat it, make the patient lie on their back, and cut away the softened skin from the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then join the two lips together with a suture, and if you wish, first sew up the excess softened skin with three or four stitches firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then cut between the sutures, and heal it like other wounds until it is sound, then remove the thread.
dou chastrement	Regarding castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	I know that astrologers are reproved in our law, and therefore I would like not to speak of them in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	And it is necessary to make an exception for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one reason being that the doctor should be able to answer when asked about it and know its treatment.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	And the other one, because we often need to castrate certain beasts to help us, like goats and sheep and cats and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that castration is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	Either by attraction or by cutting open.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and hanging down;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then grasp them with your hand so they are held back and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	On castration by cutting:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary that you tie down the beast, press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut each one with one cut after you have well scraped them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	And leave some small part of the scrotum and the thin skin that is over the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this manner of castration is more effective than that done by attraction because sometimes some part of the testicles remains, causing the beast to desire lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism exists among men in two ways:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	The first way is when between the two testicles opens also like the figure of the nature of a woman's genitals, with hair growing there, and sometimes it is opened even in the skin.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way in women, they have on their pubis both a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for both men and women is to cut away all the attached skin, and heal it like other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second way, there are those men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, for whom there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of tenaciousness
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentigene is an attached skin on the natural part that is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have it as large as their hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You must shave off the excess skin of the tentigene with your hand or scissors, and cut it away gently;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do not go too deep, so that there is no bleeding, then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	And there is another ulcer that appears at the mouth of the womb, and the belly button, sometimes it jumps fire, and is like the appearance of a cow, therefore the ancients called it 'cow disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to cut it, as we have described for tenetio, and continue treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	Of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	An error occurs when the woman's nature is not pierced, or the hole is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is either natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has come about there;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is caused by adherent flesh, either thin or thick, and it is formed deeply within the womb, or on the sides, or below, wherever it may be;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	And prevents conception, childbirth, and sometimes the flow of menstruation;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	The knowledge of this is by the appearance of the womb.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stoppages are close at hand, then seek them with your two fingers or the reed.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is thin and close to the second leaf, then hasten and cut around it like this:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	Then are the two books so shaped that the subtle sieve is round, and it overlies the stoppers.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take wool, wet it in oil, place it on the spot, and lay the woman on her back each day so that it cannot dry.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the bone is hard and dense, you must cut it like a leaf of laurel.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the stopper is of newborn flesh, then suspend it on the donkey's horn and cut it off;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	And have ready blood-stopping medicines such as achiote, dragon's blood, frankincense, mixed with egg yolk.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then prepare a wide lead funnel so that the wound cannot heal shut;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	And so let it be for a long time, and let them provide a tent made of dry linen.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then other treatments should be applied until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh-colored matter comes to the wound, you must cut it according to this manner, unless it is an incurable abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an incurable abscess that is in the wound, one must not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	Emorroides are swollen veins that occur around the rectum and anus. They can cause discomfort, pain, and bleeding during bowel movements. Here's how they were described by ancient physicians:
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are veins that normally do not release blood, and when hemorrhoids become old they become hard (thelul).
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	And we have already spoken in the section on their likeness and signs, now I will speak of those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when deeply embedded in the marrow, and cannot be felt upon examination, are not suited for iron treatment.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the mouth of the anus, that can be felt, are those which can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is therefore necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then set the altar with pincers, and grasp the womb by its roots, then powder it with medicines that restrict blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if blood flows abundantly, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall nuts and similar things, and then take barley flour and mix it with honey and bile, and apply the poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if she is cured, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, make her swallow leeches placed on her back and breasts without piercing them.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take linen, wet it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has broken, then dress the wound with ointment until it is clean.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And that which is called 'albathir' is red, resembling a sharp head, thus it must be covered as I have said earlier.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then care for him until he is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	Of boils of the belly
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the marrow, such as cancer and bone abscesses, herpes, chilblains, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the divisions.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It therefore behooves me to discuss in this treatise the hot boil that appears on the buttocks, which is not among those that burst.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the boil is hot at its beginning, full of heat and fever, and turns red as you can see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore do not hasten to pierce it, but make it burst when the pain is subdued;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then have the patient sit on a chair, with two small chairs for them to lean on, and support their back while bringing their feet together.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	And let their thighs be spread wide, place their arms beneath their knees, and bind them securely with a good bandage;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then follows the bile towards the right side, and there brings the tool with which one opens the mouth of the gallbladder, about which comes later its form;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is necessary that when you bring this tool there, you first insert the reed to know the depth of the gallbladder, so that what enters from the tool does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	And if the tool is too large, then one must cover the depth of the gallbladder with rags so that the tool does not cause injury;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is necessary to place the funnel of the tool on top, and to grease the tool.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	When the abscess opens, and one cuts with soft hand, then it is necessary to cover it with warm linen;
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	When the gallbladder is emptied, then you must put in the wound clean rags moistened with rose oil or dry green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And place a hot cloth on the wound, and put it over the wadding, and lay on top of that a linen cloth moistened with water or mallows that have been cooked.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then, after two days of appropriate ointment application, until it is healed.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	And sometimes lift off the wadding and the wound with an enema of water and honey, then water in which lilies and long-stemmed aristolochia have been cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Then reapply the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is located in the marrow, then it is necessary that you guard against cooking with fire, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is first necessary that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman bearing down and wanting to smell the air.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	Then the child quickly emerges from outside.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	Therefore know that this birth is according to the natural form, and the afterbirth is beneath its head, along with the child.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	And when you see these signs, then gently press her belly so that the child emerges quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	Because when it descends upon its head, so also does the second one with it, and the uterus is cleansed of its excesses by good cleansing.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And that which comes differently does not come naturally
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For sometimes it comes on its feet, causing the body or head to bend over backwards and the hands to stretch out, or it comes on its belly, or at times it turns upside down on its neck, assuming various evil forms;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, watchful against error and deception, and I will show you all the forms and how one must assist her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes out on its head naturally and the woman delivers it with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a saddle or have women hold her up;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and raise her nature with oil or cooked fenugreek, and then place the little spatula between her thighs, of which this is the form
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and pierce the secundine, and cut with its nail until the moisture within flows out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	And press down on the woman's belly until the child descends; and if it does not descend, then you must administer to the woman a suppository of ground fennel seed with sesame oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her inhale condimentum and sneeze; hold her mouth and nose for one hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	The child will now be born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands come out first, you must gently push them back little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot be pushed back in, then have the woman sit down and lift her feet up.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then tilt the chair towards the ground, and hold onto the woman so she does not fall during this maneuver;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands still cannot be pushed in and the child is dying, then cut through the skin at the joint placed beforehand, extract the child, and reset it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	after the child emerges feet-first
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes onto his feet, then you must lift him up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then slowly turn him bit by bit until he is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then seize one of the legs and stretch it gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it reaches the thighs, then command him to grasp it, and let him sneeze accordingly;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If fever occurs, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not come forth as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will come forth easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if fever does not occur as we have said, then take musk, aloe, sesame oil, melted gum, and grind them all together in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	And place this ointment on the woman's womb and keep her sitting in hot water up to her chest;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when she is warmed underneath, place for her a collar of myrrh, put it beneath her, and let her wear it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child is coming out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	"of the birth of the child onto her knees"
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When a child arrives in this form, then the bailiff puts his hands softly and softly.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	Then he is suspended by his neck, with his feet dangling down, lying on the bed
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	And folds his hands gently and gently, then he takes the hands onto the belly, removing cushions underneath until it's aligned below
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	If the child does not jump, take his feet and shake them firmly, then move your belly upwards, then place your hands
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	And raise the child gently
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to hold on until the child comes out
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	"of the birth of the child that comes from the womb with one hand held back;"
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I must devise how to reset the hand
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be reset, then have the woman stand up and walk around
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, then have her lie on the bed and forcefully raise her legs
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the muscilage that I described
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, have her sit on a seat and then examine how to reset the hand
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	Wash the child according to its natural figure, and make it sneeze, and instruct her to take so much that the child passes wind.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	"of the birth of the child onto its neck with hands spread out and face turned towards its mother's back;"
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary for the servant to take his hand, then turn it little by little, and wash it gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is even, put on the muscular nature of old mallow and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	After you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and instruct her to take it;
et la fai esternuer.	And make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	"In the same manner for the afterbirth;"
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When the child passes wind in this manner throughout the entire afterbirth, cut off the afterbirth with your fingernail until all moisture is emptied;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the child lies on its face and neck, cut off the umbilical cord at the navel so that it is not retained, lest the child die;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then place the child inside, until you have positioned it as necessary, and instruct the woman to push once more:
adonques si istra legierement.	Therefore, it must be straightened gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	"Concerning the birth of twins;"
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	It happens frequently that twins are born, sometimes three or four at a time;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not an uncommon occurrence.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	It is rare for them to live long, if they are even born.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied in number and are destroyed by the evil spirit who cuts them apart, which is joined to the womb;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they come out naturally like one whole, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are born crying, then the treatment should be carried out as we have said, and the physician should be skilled and act quickly and gently.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	He should do this in such a way that it leads to healing.
de plusors enfans	"Concerning multiple births;"
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the mother’s womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or even more up to fifteen, and all are perfectly formed into the shape of a child by the measure of the glorious sage, and the physician should know all these things because such things may happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If it is done according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	Concerning a dead child:
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman for a dead fetus or pregnancy outside of its usual course, and there is no progress, and you are compelled to intervene.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	It is necessary that you know if the woman has a healthy temperament, and whether she has any accidents or fears death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	It is necessary for the woman to be laid on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the assistant should hold her thighs at a 90-degree angle, or tie her to the bed so that she does not slide down during childbirth.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the woman's mouth with moist oil made from mastic and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed, then anoint your hands with these oils and preparations.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then insert your hand into the woman gently, then seek the location where she feels contractions, and ensure that if the child is coming out, it does so face down.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If you insert the hot iron into his eyes or neck or mouth or throat or cheeks or below the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs, and if the descent is on foot, insert it or prick at the sides of the chest.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and he must hold the hot iron in his right hand, place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and gently press it with all his might, inserting it into any of these places that we have mentioned until the thing is emptied.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the cautery iron:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then insert it against the other cautery iron, or the third one if necessary, so that the extraction is even.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other for easier removal, and let the cautery iron have teeth for better grip, as shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if some part remains, then oil some of his fingers and press them on that part, and pull the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If it remains there not at all, place this poultice higher up and do so until all the fire exits.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot return due to tension, you must wrap a cloth around it until it releases all.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then strike at the joint of the sole or the wrist, and likewise do so for the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	If the child's head is large and narrow at the outlet, or has a sharp point assembled there, you must insert the spine of the spatula between your two fingers, split open the top, and extract the point.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or else round it with the instrument called 'almidach', from which the form comes with the instruments that are in the chapter following this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And do likewise if the child is born with a large head naturally.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	Then pull out the bones with tongs; and if the head is stuck and held by forceps, split it open until the moisture in the piss outlet comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	If it cannot come out, then cut it apart piece by piece until you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	If the abdomen or lower ribs are swollen, you must pierce it so that the moisture escapes.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, the attraction is light and the directions at the mouth of the uterus are easy
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is stuck in the belly or breast, you must pull it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and make an incision into the belly or breast until the moisture comes out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	And if other bones remain and the head stays in place, insert your hand deeply into the socket and pull it out through the mouth of the socket;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then put one or two fingers inside and pull it out forcefully.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	And if the mouth of the socket is narrowed by heat from inflammation that has come there, then do not work it further, but apply moist and fatty substances.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And use plasters for treatment, as well as warm, softening, and moistening ointments.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on his side, and you can make him even, then apply what we have said regarding a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if there is no power [i.e., no one available to help], then perform trepanation with caution, leaving nothing of the afterbirth behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And once you have done this, if [the patient] is suffering from hot abscesses that come about in the marrow.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if there is bleeding from the veins, let it be drawn with warm water, and other treatments applied [to the patient].
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been killed, then she conceived another upon it, and the other was killed.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After many days, there appeared an abscess on his cheek, which swelled until it opened, and then began to discharge copiously.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned to the hospital, where I pondered long and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster with strong adhesion, from which came forth one bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I saw the wound, and many bones were injured, until the woman was at her wit's end;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And the woman lived thus for a long time, and a little bit of bone came out from its place [i.e., the wound].
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wrote this chapter so that when a master finds something unusual, he may know how to provide assistance.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to reset the dislocation
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Hereafter comes the form of the pressure [appliance], which is illustrated in books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	And to the return of the two heads of the two kidneys.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, let the horn be more subtle than the restrictor, and let it be made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And let the mouth of the wood be two inches wide, and the edge of the tree one-half a palm long;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And in the two ligaments there should be two joints of this same wood that close on both ends, each half a palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these two joints are placed in the mouth of the mallet to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood wood, resembling tweezers;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	And have at both ends two joints, each half a palm long and two inches wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	And when you want to open the mallet with all the instruments, have the woman sit on a bed with her feet dangling and legs spread apart, then place the two joints joined together into the mallet and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then open your hand to the instrument, just as you have done with even forceps, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the wound, until the boil bursts.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all mounted, and their appearances are multiplied;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the physician has prepared them, the faster the operation is, and the greater it appears to people because of its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disregard any instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is not negligible.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the woman to raise her buttocks and then make her sneeze with condisium powder, while holding your hands over her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she sneezes because of it, all the better.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the wound in it, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, alkanet, and centory;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over the fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then place a tube with holes from the pot's opening into the mouth of the patient and hold it until steam enters the patient.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make them sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the woman expels quickly
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if after this treatment it remains uncured and not free of fever, then order the maidservant to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in musk-mallow ointment, then place it on the navel and rub gently.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she has found it, take it and pull it out gradually and gently, so that the patient does not fall during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But one must move it lightly to the right and left, then draw it out.
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes and gets disentangled
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the patient's mouth is narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	And if it is not as we have said, then make sure you do not err in the treatment.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	However, you must tie what is at the mouth of the womb to the woman's thigh, then perform a cleansing with oil of tetraharmacon.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	If it swells and returns, then fire will come.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	But nonetheless, when it swells, evil odor comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Therefore, fumigations suitable for this are necessary:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Many of the ancients have proven fumigation with mustard and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate women retained in labor or delivery is as follows
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is similar in appearance to a cake, and one places the head carefully on its nature, and the wide heads on the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigation be upon the coals, until the thread is consumed, then begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born whose anus is not pierced but obstructed by some subtle membrane:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore it is necessary for the bath attendant to prick this part with her finger, and not pricking with a sharp point, carefully cleansing the wound so that she does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place moist linen soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply the remedy of ointment until it is clean.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you suspect that it may become blocked again, insert a lead tube into the opening and leave it in place for several days, then remove it when the child is ready to go to bed
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this swelling comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	So one must cover it suddenly:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Whether it is cauterized, as we have said about the boil.
de la fistule dou fondement	of fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come underneath the fundament are called nodations, and growths that come near to the fundament, or in the space of the anus, if there is one fistula or more;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when that nodation is ancient, it opens up, and emits moist foul-smelling or subtle bowels, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are recognized by this: that there is a discharge of wind or farting when the patient excretes, and sometimes one sees a worm leap out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And there are fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach as far as the hip joint, and even up to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes a fistula piercing the fundament, not the skin:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is necessary that you insert your two index fingers into the fundament and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula where there is no winding.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has windings, then insert a thin reed or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the reed or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it and there is no discharge of air through the opening, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not pierce.
si te haste dou curer.	If you hurry to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	"And when the fistula persists down to the bladder or down to the passage of urine, so that urine squirts out and cannot be stopped by medication."
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it pierces as far as the hip joint, then the reed comes out at that place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no winding and the pain around it increases, then it is necessary to leave it be, and no medication or salve will help;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And for these Persian fistulas there is no remedy except effort, it is the vainty of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In those that are not Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing through iron; as I have experienced, and it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back between your hands.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And lift the legs up to the thighs, and keep the thighs inclined toward the abdomen;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then insert an awl or trocar if there is coiling, until you know where the tube emerges.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around their anus, then you must insert your two index fingers there, until you feel that the tube has pierced through.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	And when you feel between your fingers either the sigmoid or the flesh, then know that it is Persian;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If not, do not work on it unless one can heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said everywhere that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the aid one performs here, is to heat the cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	And place the heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches the bottom;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	Repeat this twice or three times, until you know that these broken hairs are burnt, which resemble a bird's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then apply wet lint to burn until those hairs fall out, and finally apply ointment around the wound and bandage it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is healed thus, all the better.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If not, otherwise it cannot be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if the tent enters but does not reach the depth of the fistula, place between your two fingers and the tent a thick covering of flesh or wax, so that you can see where the fistula opens.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	So find the entrance of the fistula, insert the tent first, and then apply the cautery afterward until it reaches the tip of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the pain will cease, and it will fall away;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then remove those shattered bones that resemble a bird's feather, so that nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	"And if your hand trembles and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with hot medicine."
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery has two uses:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of these adhering bones and the stopping of blood flow and the drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then treat moist pains with wax or crushed herbs until the place swells up and the burned bone appears in the swelling
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound by applying poultices of hot oils and hard grease, which are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	"For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not return."
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	"And if the fistula comes from deep inside the fundament and is far away from the body, put your finger into the fundament and feel for it."
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the pain and between two there is cloth or skin or bone where it is about to pierce through, then use fire with caution and hope, by administering one of these three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it until it reaches the bottom, or if you can, apply dressings and treat it as at first.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And go not too deep, lest thou touch the holding that holds the fundament; let the evacuation come forth without will.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then the treatment, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	Perhaps it will then be healed; or remove that covering and cleanse it after it has been cut near the fundament, either by attempt or by some other pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then cleanse that faulty flesh which is in the wound as much as thou canst;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then consider how to restore the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	So that it may be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes fistulas are of this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	When thou dost thrust the needle into the fistula, and it is on the side of the fundament near the skin above, then take a needle pierced at the head thus:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	"And tie one thread around two places, and put the probe all the way into the fistula until it reaches the tip."
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it passes into the margin of the fundament within, then pull out the thread from that piercing, so that thou dost thrust thy thumb upon the fundament;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	And draw the head of the thread, bring together the two shoulder blades, bind one to the other, leave it for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And restrain it several times until the threads cut through these tissues that lie between them and separate;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then dress the wound until it is healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	"If the fistula does not open on its own, then make it open in every way that you can, if it is not too deep."
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"For it is not necessary to cut so deeply for the closure and then treat it as we have said until it heals."
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinal needle used to create a fistula should be thin and pointed.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand not sharp, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	"hemorrhoids"
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	There are two kinds of emorydesis:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Either they are within the fundament like grains of resin, some small and others large, there is blood on the skin at times, some have one and others have several, they are defective in the fundament or at the head of the fundament;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those that are defective lack moisture and appear on the skin with a little yellowish water or blood, having the color of flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those who have them in their fundament, it is that you instruct the patient to strain while going to the latrine, until the fundament expels them, and then they will appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, grasp it with forceps or pinch it with your nail, then cut it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the tweezers cannot hold them due to moisture, then grasp them with cloth or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	Then extract them with your two fingers, cut them off, and apply some warm powders in place of a cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or you may cauterize them as is said in the chapter on cauteries, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	And if the fundament cannot expel them, then administer to the patient a strong and harsh enema to wash out what is in the fundament so that it can be excreted openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If the patient is unconscious, and if the hairs are forcibly removed at their base, then treatment is easy.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And you should grasp them with your nail or forceps and cut them, then treat them as we have said until they are healed, so that he fears incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	You must arrange the suturing in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take one thread twisted, and pass it through a needle, then draw the thread upwards and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and let them be wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	And pull the thread firmly, then tie it, remove the needle, and do likewise for all the others, leaving one free to correct any excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place a damp cloth moistened with rose oil or wax on the base, and cover it, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let him be until they fall out, and when they do, treat them with ointment and other treatment until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	on the drying of fecal matter on the fundament
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a drying of feces in the intestines, and this occurs due to constriction of nature, especially when the patient is elderly or when medication is ineffective
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you must reset at the tip of a spatula or with your nail, scrape off the scurf on top so it does not get wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then treat it until it is solid as it ought to be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot hold fast, then start the scraping again more vigorously than before, until it bleeds freely and becomes raw.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is clean.
dou fremit	fever
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Ants are small creatures that often appear on the body, and they bite deeply;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes the cold finds them, and it feels like death from trembling, spreading throughout the whole body, but especially in the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is this: take a cane made from a goose feather or a strong eagle feather, and place that cane on the trembling so that the circle encompasses the trembling entirely;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then twist your hand around the entire cane until you have covered all around the trembling, drive it deep inside and crush the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit to do so with a feather of iron or steel according to this form, and it should be thin underneath and tapering at the tip
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Does not perceive, to hold the two, and press the muscles.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, cauterize the trembling, as it is before in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of a clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes a silver or lead enema is made, or melted gold or hammered tin;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and sometimes these tools are made small and large according to those for whom they are intended.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those which are prepared for the treatment of children and those who are weak and feeble should be small
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of a small or large clyster is as follows: wide where the belly is bound in this manner
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is a disturbance or the belly is bound up, as you see, and the entrails are pierced within;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and there are two perforations on one side and one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the belly is placed where medicines are put into a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small perforations, and there is one space between each perforation; then strong thread of roughened wool is twisted in an X-shape or wound around, and the belly is closed like a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside [the patient], then tie it to the instrument beforehand with a strong thread, and then administer an enema.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	Let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and grease the tip of the enema with oil or a mixture of egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the minister presses with both hands together until it is completely empty, then remove the enema, and the patient lifts their legs towards the side, and if the medicine wants to come out, tie it as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if he sleeps all night [after this treatment], it will be of greater benefit.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you perform a clyster on someone with abdominal descent disease, and the medication rushes to come out, then begin again until it is finished."
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscess, let the enema be as subtle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	This is the shape of the subtle enema where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	"of wounds"
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the section on divisions;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	I shall tell you about treatments for hands and medicines according to their fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to where the wounds are made, and of what they are made."
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Wounds are made by blows from stones, cuts from swords and knives, or from lances, clubs, arrows, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or according to the location on the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck, head, thigh, belly, liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, for memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it was caused by a blow from a stone or similar things, and if the skin is torn all around and the wound is large, be wary of a hot abscess forming.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	Then quickly wash it with cold water from the Cephalic source, especially if there is a flow of blood from the wound, and let the washing be done towards the opposite part of the injured area;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And let the patient avoid being full of wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not wish to recover, then his food should be reduced, and he should drink no wine nor eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And put on the wound, if an abscess appears there, cotton moistened in rose oil alone or in astringent wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	And if there is no hot abscess, then put on the wound, fresh blood from its entirety and not moved by air, powder which I will mention later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the air has moved it, then put some ointments on it until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	"And if the wound is large, such as from a sword cut or similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by tension, then bring them together by stitching, as I will describe for abdominal wounds."
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is open to the bone and gaping, and hangs only by a little, cut it off.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicines, and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and order the patient to eat fatty foods such as testicles and cooked wheat, also poultry and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rottenness in the skin without reaching the bone, cut out all the rotting flesh and cast it away, then dress [the wound].
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein without skin, which cannot be stopped by medications, seek out the artery. If you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if this does not help, cauterize [the artery].
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	If these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And you should apply this powder which will seal before the wound closes.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	The method of preparing the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	Take frankincense, one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	Dragon's blood, two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	Grind the mixture finely and sprinkle it onto the wound, then bind it tightly until it adheres well and joins with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	And then tie it securely, leaving it without being untied unless it swells.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For medicine is not removed until it is ripe.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	"Sometimes this is also done with quicklime alone when incense and dragon's blood are not available, but before the air touches the wound."
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has moved, especially during summer, do not put this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digestive oils or poultices made of barley flour and honey mixed with water until it weeps;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if bone fragments come with the wound and it is small, remove them with fine forceps;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about head fractures.
de la plaie dou col	"of the wound on the neck"
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	"If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between that and one on the head, except if the nerve of the neck or an artery is cut."
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave it alone and not put anything constricting on it, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not apply anything cold to the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	But let the medicine be warm, like hot water washed in soft water and mixed with rose oil, and cabbage washed likewise in soft water, and other moist fomentations according to this manner, and moist poultices.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the wound is large, then stitch it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals."
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if wounds are deep and the boil is raised and full of pus, pierce it lower down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if an artery is cut, and blood flows copiously, ligate it, and tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the heart, and the blood vessels are preserved through which the flesh receives nourishment, then press the heart against the spine of the neck, and do not touch the neck but reset it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then bind it tightly, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has gone into the bone, scrape it out.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And if there are fragments of bone, burn them all away if you can, and those that you cannot have burned, let the wound fester until it is evacuated and its discharge tied off.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as described in its chapter
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of wounds from spears or knives
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it's a wound from a lance or knife and it's deep, observe if any wind comes out of the wound as the patient breathes.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	then know that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it's not deep but fresh with blood throughout, do not apply the powder at first or bind it too tightly, lest the blood return inward and reach the heart, killing the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but apply an attractive ointment and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you have no ointment, put some old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	So that there will be no spasm nor harmful trembling of the heart's breath.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see these good signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat with compresses and other remedies until it is healed.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	And if it cannot heal nor close, know that there is a fistula present;
si la cure si com on doit.	If the treatment is carried out as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a cut made by a sword or knife, and it is simple, whether on the front or back, then treat what is visible;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If it is large, sew it up;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	And if it is small, apply powder to it. And if it is pressed against the bone and has cut off pieces, then cleanse the wound and treat any exposed flesh.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not exposed, let the wound fester so that the extraction will be easier.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	Abdominal dropsy can be large, moderate, or small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	And sometimes a large wound allows the intestines or the nerve of the intestines to protrude;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the stitch is more difficult, sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because if one sets it too point by point, the intestines are not set properly.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Therefore, because the intestines swell immediately when they feel cold and shrink more tightly, it is better to move the wound a little so that one can reposition the intestines in their place rather than elsewhere.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that an abdominal hernia occurs in four ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The first two stitches occur in the abdominal stitch, and two other common stitches are found in other wounds of the body.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And moreover, they are more suitable for the abdominal stitch, and I will explain each one and make it clear.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine sticking out, and there is little to reset, this is done in one of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	Or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen with cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it in such a way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Wet a sponge or clean cloth in only warm water, or cook in boiling water with cumin and cypripedium and spikenard, and wring out the intestines until the swelling is gone;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes this restrictive wine, and it is believed that [with] a sole [fish], to draw out the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling departing, then mix the intestines with water or decocted aloe and mallows, for by this the entrance is eased somewhat;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it still cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with the instrument used to cauterize hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	And the first treatment is believed to be that which makes the cut, and no one should cut there without great necessity;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the tool for splitting [it].
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If it does not cut within the curve and outwards, see here the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines stick out, then carefully put them back according to their natural shape into their proper place if you can, for this is important.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and it is located below the belly, you should make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	And if it is located below the belly, place the head and chest higher than the lower parts; also, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, make sure that the wounded part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus it should be arranged like this in large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	In small wounds, place what you have prepared, then use one hand gently to pull the whole wound with your fingers and bring together the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common method of suturing: take one or more needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave two spans from the beginning of the wound, and insert a needle with strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the sinew, which is beneath the skin inside, until you make it pierced from that part, and bring together the two heads of the sinew in a group of four;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then tie a doubled thread around the needle at both ends, then bring together the two heads of the wound evenly, and then leave two spaces apart, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then tie the thread knot as you did with the first needle, and continue to do so according to how many needles you need until all of the wound is bound;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, for thin needles cut all of the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well;
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	So that they must be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not necessary to push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before it can be closed;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And then cut off the points of needles so they do not pierce the patient while sleeping, and place bandages or cloths on the points of needles to keep them in place until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	And this method of sewing with needles is more useful for small wounds, as it requires only one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second sewing method is common, and it involves bringing together the two edges of skin and the two edges of flesh with one needle using medium-strength thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And once you have pierced all three edges with the needle, pull it back towards where you started, like sewing cloth.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And space each stitch about the thickness of a small finger.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This sewing method serves well, and I once sewed a wound that one man had in his belly, which was caused by a knife cut over a palm's length, and guts were protruding two palms' length, and the wound was within the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I reset the intestine afterwards when he had been feverish for 24 hours, and the wound healed up to 15 days, which I dressed, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctors had judged him to die, but it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with an ointment, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and twice daily I put clean cotton on the wound and washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	I will tell you the two proper ways to stitch:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and pass it from the outer part to the inner;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the heart directly, then lay the head of the cobbler's awl or cost where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	And the purpose of this stitch is that you sew like a furrier sews furs, leaving the awl on one side once and taking it up again on the other, until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of suturing, which Galen describes precisely, is as follows: some people join the two parts naturally and apply one end of the thread to the other in this manner.
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Stick a needle into the nearby Chief Dou Mirach tendon and pierce it alone; leave both ends of the thread out.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle and pierce it from the outer part to the inner one, at both ends of the thread;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce each one again from the outer part to the inner one in two other Chief Dou Mirach tendons that are located on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the most correct and common method of suturing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen also says that one should suture the abdomen with two needles, each having thread;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew hides;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And know that when the ulcer is within the belly, the wound is harder to heal than from other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is like the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, before the air has moved it, then reset the intestines and the skin.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then place on the powder surrounding the flesh, and if the air has moved it, then place some ointment that is available, so that the wound closes.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and tie up the stitches, and let the edges of the incision and the middle close up;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as you would any other, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have medicines, then place cotton wool on it as soon as it begins to close up, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For in many cases where wounds are simple, there is no need for any other medicine besides this;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	And if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main limbs, then it is necessary to wet light linen in warm rose oil or rose-colored oil, and place it around the angles and beneath the armpits.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	And if he feels pain or corruption in the bowels, and this happens often, then black wine suppositories are beneficial, especially if the corruption reaches the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierce it within, knowing that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The gut called 'jejunum' cannot heal when injured due to the thinness of its veins and the delicacy of its entire structure, as well as its closeness to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the herb jumps out of the wound, then replace it immediately like the intestine while it is still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	And if it is old and has turned green or black, then tie the place that is black so that no blood flows there, for there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut what is between the tie, and place the two heads hanging down from the part below the wound up to its front for facilitating extraction when the herb falls out and the wound opens.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the bowel
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some people, for I saw that one man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which the digestion and wind escaped;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I knew, and did not cease until he was healed, with the wound soundly closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it heal, I feared that the patient might be suffering in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	but there was no harm done, and he remained in better condition, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And some experts said that when the intestine has a small wound, it should be tied up in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	Take large leeches, then gather the edges of the wound together, and when the leech has opened its mouth, place it on both lips so that it sucks them.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	And then he cuts off the head, and this holds so that it cannot be untied; then he adds another tremor afterwards in the same manner as before until the wound is completely closed.
et cout la plaie.	And closes the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	These stones can enter the intestines without causing harm to the patient; and the intestines can be tied together with a fine thread cut from the intestines of an animal in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this gut thread that is very skinned, and then tie to its head a thin twisted linen thread; then place the thread into the needle, and sew up the gut, and reset it in place.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of suturing tremors is not outside the scope of trust and hope
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, then there is no skill or health that can help except for delicacy.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know this: every wound or abscess, when it opens up, is universally called a 'fistula', and similarly when it is cut open and swells back.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is, according to truth, broken and hard, white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also called like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in clear water, and at other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes small, and at other times ample;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	And I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not clean and has no flesh, only appears by one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, through the smallness of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its evil nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to form;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or if there is too much water;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or if the place is putrid, and the matter is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or if the medicine is not good in its care;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because corruption is of a pestilent nature;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is slow to digest and heal, and is naturally inflamed.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Where there are veins or bones
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medicinal treatments in this division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	"Now I must tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is done through manual labor."
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	For there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the face, intestine, bladder, ribs, spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And there are some that come from the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and only labor and ignorance are responsible for them;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I have mentioned, and you are confident about its cure, and you recognize it, then take a tent of brass or iron, and apply it to the fistula;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, search for it with a subtle tent of lead, because lead bends more easily around its twistiness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	If the fistula has many openings and you cannot examine it well by touch, then apply a clyster through one of the openings because moisture passes quickly from one opening to another, and this will cleanse it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then search for bleeding as much as you can, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and how deep it goes. Ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when you press your hand on it, and where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	And when you truly know where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have told you about, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the broken bone and rotted flesh that is inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	Then treat it until it is healed. And if the fistula is very deep in its proper place, you must cut as deeply as possible, then put moistened lint soaked in hot water into medicine into it, up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine can corrode the excess flesh left at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I apply hot poultices of clean flesh until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	If not healed by this, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If vein or nerve does not trouble you in the principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it until all corruption is removed, then treat with hot poultices of clean flesh until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	And if not healed, return as before, knowing that you have not yet reached the end:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	So uncover and search until you reach the bottom, remove all corruption, then replace it in its proper place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if thus healed, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	So there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there is a small broken bone, and you can grasp it with pliers, then extract it using the appropriate instrument; but if there are many bones, then remove them all, leaving none behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if moisture opposes you, and there is no mistake or fear, cut away the moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something irritating to cause rot on the wound and leave it until the spot around the bones is rotted away, then the bones will come out more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it's a large bone, such as one in the leg or thigh, then remove only the corruption until all the blackness is gone, then close the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is much corruption and it reaches almost to the bone.
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	Then it must be cut all the way down to the corruption, and then cured until it is sound.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	The young man was about 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from an internal cause such that matter came to the leg and it became swollen with a large abscess, without any apparent reason to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	Yet the doctors in their foolishness cut so much upon it that the abscess opened, and they dug out much matter, and it became a fistula, and many passages formed that continually emitted wind and moisture from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And many doctors tried to treat it for about two years, but none of them were skilled in the art of hands, until I was called and saw his leg and the medicines they used, and what flowed through the passages with great force.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And the young man's body became red, and he had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, then searched all the holes, and found that one came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I then hurried, and cut into one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, which was found rotten and pierced; and the corruption had reached the bone inside.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other corruption besides that which I removed;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And began to dress the wound with healing medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And then started again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found that the corruption had continued into the bone itself, which I scraped out, and then closed up the wound.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	But still it did not heal until I cut around a palm's width of the bone and scraped it clean down to its marrow, then dressed it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And it quickly became healed and sound, but the patient's weakness could not endure much more, and fear of death made me stop.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood occurred often, but he was entirely cured, and in place of the bone there grew hard flesh, and it was well disposed and had no harm nor opposite in any way, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if a bone is broken anywhere in the body, it must be set in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	Take linen, and bind it around the head of the exposed bone, and command someone to stretch it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and place another larger linen bandage over the first one and bind it above the flesh that is over the bone; then stretch the head so that you can pull out the corrupted flesh below and expose the flesh on the spot where you want the bone to be.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a splint or a board underneath the bone to move away the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	This must be done until one can see and feel all of the corruption, then it should be done again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted but not exposed, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then expose all of the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then place a splint underneath and stretch from one end of the corruption to the other, with the bandage being as long as the corruption is wide, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if corruption is at the joint, cut the corrupted joint, even if it contains bone on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if corruption is in the continuity of two joints, there is no other choice but to cut.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if corruption is at the wrist of the hand or at the ankle, that is very serious indeed; nevertheless you must investigate what caused this corruption.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And clean it in every way you can, but be careful not to harm any veins or nerves;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And know that the incising tools and saws used to cut these bones are many, depending on the arrangement of the bones, their appearance from outside, their thickness and fineness, their length and shortness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And therefore one must prepare each type of tool for its corresponding task.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And know that the work will show you which tool you need to use, according to your knowledge of this art and the signs of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you consider the instrument with which you have need according to what is fitting.
dou feu	Fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head rots either from internal causes or from external ones;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated that corruption with medicines but they do not help, then it is necessary to cut off that limb up to the point where the corruption reaches so that the patient escapes from death or from the greater harm of losing the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	And the sign is that the limb turns black as if burned by fire, and after the blackening, the corruption spreads from limb to limb, spreading throughout the body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	So hasten to cut it off; and if it is due to the bite of some venomous beasts like a sea scorpion or snake etc., then cut at the root of the two limbs, but do not let it come as far as the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches the hand, then cut it off at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	And if it happens to the arm, cut at the elbow.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And if it passes the elbow, then death will occur, and no amount of medicine can save them due to the quantity of its poison.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	And likewise when corrosion comes upon the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	If it happens at the first joint, then cut after the next joint
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it reaches the foot, then cut off the whole foot.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it goes up into the leg, then cut at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	And if it is above the knee, there is no other option but to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And the method of cutting off or cauterizing a limb is as follows: you should tie it above and below with ropes, extend one servant downwards from one of the ties and another upwards from the other tie, then cut away the flesh between the two ties using a wide knife until the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Then cut or cauterize it and place a linen cloth on each side so that the cautery does not touch the healthy flesh, causing further injury or an abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if bleeding occurs while you are operating, cauterize the area promptly using powders that constrain blood.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your treatment until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with an appropriate bandage and care for it until it is healed;
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to one in great need:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	a blackness appeared on him as if burnt by fire, and this corruption first came upon his big toe of the foot, spreading to consume the whole foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the man saw the corruption, he hastily cut off his foot and was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And long afterward the corruption came upon the second toe of his hand, and he came to me, and I applied things that bounce back after cleansing his body, but the corrosion could not stop;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he asked me to cut off his hand, which I refused, for I hoped to repel the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	And I also feared that if I cut his hand off, he would die, for the power of man was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	And he became utterly despairing and returned to his land and hurried to have his hand healed, and he recovered.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Only this story is told for the sake of those who might otherwise act differently when there is need.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No boil ever appears on tender flesh and remains so long that it collects a great mass of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then it bursts open and oozes out, leaving the spot empty like an emptied vessel.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	And the skin on top is as delicate as the finest cloth and does not reach down to bone or nerve; such a disease is called 'clean' and is not called 'fistula';
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	But if it extends so far that it reaches down to bone and depth, then it is called 'fistula'.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And you must cut that skin all around, even if it is delicate, just like cutting a piece of cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	And do not be concerned about its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	If you suspect that the skin is rotting but the decay is not deep and the skin is thick with flesh, then perform a cleansing enema like this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Examine whether the breast is large and the belly that is emitting a foul odor; then administer an Egyptian-style cleansing enema made like this:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take asafoetida, oil, and lead, in equal amounts, and cook them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take some of this according to your need, dilute it in water and honey, and administer the cleansing enema to the breast, closing the opening tightly;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	Leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until the breast is softened, and the pus is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and sometimes it is irrigated with water of ashes when this medicine is not present; take ashes of vinewood and pour water on them, then strain it, and use it for irrigation until you know that the breast is well cleaned.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then irrigate with water and honey mixed together with a little powdered lead.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you may irrigate with a mixture of honey and wine, for honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the blood airy.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And when you have done this and are confident that the breast is well cleaned, then irrigate with something that causes flesh to form there; take prepared tragacanth and mix it with rose oil in wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	When you use clysters of certain medications and ointments, about which I have spoken when treating ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	And if the opening to the chest is small and the tube of the clyster cannot enter, then enlarge it slightly with an iron tool, and place a wick of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment inside until it is widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the wound is too wide, then you should only close it enough so that the clyster can enter, and if the opening that drips below is above, then cut it at or lower than its level.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the wound is deep, do not let flesh grow inside;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the chest below as you wish, then arrange it in such a way that the wound extends to its lowest level; for when the wound is deep, do not let flesh grow inside and if you cannot cover the chest below as you wish
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	That the bow runs lightly downwards; leave nothing of the bow.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	And take medicines that consolidate to put on the wound, and press onto the linen cloth that covers all the wound
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then push firmly against the opening of the wound with a cloth about one finger wide; press gently onto another cloth according to the size of the wound and place it on the wound to alleviate pressure from the bowels. Do not remove the outer cloth except once every few days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And that which is on the opening of the wound, often remove it to remove the bowels, and know what comes from the bowels: whether it's venomous or little or much, or digested, or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not; when your medicine has been applied in this manner, observe how it covers the wound opening, so you know that the chest is already healthy, and recovery approaches.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then relieve it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you dress the wound, change to another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast throws undigested bowel after many days, know that the breast has not healed yet.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come after a long time, do not despair of health, for healing approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people whose wounds take too long to heal with flesh, and others that do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if undigested food suddenly jumps from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach has not emptied.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	And if the stomach is slow to empty and feels distant, apply drying medicines that are moist in substance but dry in power, such as diaphoretic plaster, for it contains much vitriol, which is the last medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take diaphoretic plaster, and they make it with rose oil, and raise it with old wine equal in substance.
puis le confit et en use;	Then cook it and use it
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And if you cannot find diaphoretic plaster, or make it yourself better, take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, grind them, and powder them onto the honey while it is on the fire
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And then wrap it in a cloth, and stretch it over the chest, and sometimes administer an ointment made from long pepper and celestial lily roots, which is also like wheat flour and centory.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	And in the use of simples or composites:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	Grind them into powder, mix it with the honey I mentioned, and apply it as needed.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, know that the corruption has gone deep and is pressing on the bone, or on hard members, or on ligaments.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If it's a fistula cure, as we have mentioned earlier
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the boil on the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	A panaric is an abscess that develops under the nail of the little finger of the hand or foot, or sometimes in other toes.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it is neglected as it ages, an abscess forms and spreads, eating away and digging down until it reaches the root of the nail, sometimes even destroying the entire nail.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And corrosion reaches to the bone, causing foul-smelling pain; the thighs are two broad ones, and the color is yellow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If the treatment we have described does not help, then you must cut away with iron all the excess that remains of the nail, and afterwards cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is very helpful if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to prick and suppurate, you should put the edge of a knife beneath the nail that is pricking the flesh, lift it up, scrape off that delicate flesh lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat with ointments until it is healed
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption reaches the bone, scrape it off and cauterize with fire, for as long as corrupt bone remains there, it will not heal
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see the bone beginning to decay, scrape it off immediately as described above, then treat until it is healed
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is severe and painful, you should first cauterize it
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the nail of the big toe on an angle across, and ensure that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, as the patient would feel great pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it does, then place something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain from the wound of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Some people are born with the second joint [toe] completely fleshy, and sometimes there is cartilage where there should be bone, and occasionally there is a nail, and some are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in certain bones.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	He who is born with any knot of the thumb cannot move it, and he who is born at the joint of the thumb can sometimes move it.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The cut on one that is fleshy will be easy in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a wide spatu
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure
si te tien dou coper.	Hold it while cutting.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those born with a knot on the back of the tendon, first carefully cut around the flesh down to the bone, then cut the bone at an appropriate angle, and then clean it until it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that come together at both sides come from birth, or from the welding of a wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	You must cut that union so that the thumbs return to their natural forms
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two wet cloths or bandages soaked in rose oil so they do not join together
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you can place between two pieces of thin lead until the joint is well set as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If dislocations come to any of his limbs with the palm, cut that fusion appropriately
des vils	Of the wicked
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large vessels wrapped around, full of melancholic excesses, which come from many members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and this happens more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you must administer to him some times a purge of bile, and then cleanse him with the holy water.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The cure by fire is done in two ways:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	One way is to cut them off, and draw out the black blood with a feather;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is that you open the vein and draw all of it out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cutting is done in this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	First, rinse the leg with very hot water until the thick blood becomes subtilized, then press the leg of the patient from above the hip down to below the knee joint;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in one, two or three places with a wide cut, then lift it up and draw out the black blood by hand from one end to the other until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then the ointment, and instruct him to smear himself with meat juices mixed with black colophony;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and resume the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are full, harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The raising of him is done in this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Raise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs, then place him in a bath, and raise the leg with warm water until it becomes red and the veins swell;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you have no bath, heat him by the fire, and then cut near the vein at the long part of the knee joint, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin with an awl, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	And one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white thread;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then place the probe beneath until it lifts the vein from the skin, and then lightly prick with an awl, then cut in another place three inches beyond.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scrape off the skin over the vein until it appears, then raise it with tweezers, as you have done before, and attach it to another clamp, as you did first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then cut another incision, or several if needed, then raise it and cut at the two ends of the foot, then drag and raise it up to the second incision.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract it inch by inch until it all comes out, then cut it off.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot drag and raise it, then insert a needle with strong doubled thread into it, tie it and pull it out, place it under the skin, and turn your hand back and forth until it all comes out
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure not to cut it, for if it cuts, you cannot pull or raise it, causing harm to the patient
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And once you have extracted all of it, place on the wound a wool pad soaked in vinegar and rose oil
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heal until he is sound.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and coiled together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cut it completely.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And draw it out as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one cuts a vein is curved, and does not cut deep, so that it does not cut into the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And has a large curve, for if it were thin it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the public vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein enters into the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and on dry land without moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And sometimes it occurs in places other than the legs, and this happens due to rot that comes beneath the skin, like how worms and snakes enter between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to protrude forth, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the head opens, you must wrap a piece of cloth around it, from one and a half to two spans long, tie it, and let the cloth hang on the leg. And every time blood flows out, wrap the cloth around the iron and tie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap up the remainder, and do not cut near its root, so that all of it may be completely removed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it will retreat into the flesh, causing an abscess and rot in the area, and bad illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Therefore, it must be treated little by little until the top, and nothing should remain on the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	And sometimes this vein appears when treated from 6 to 8 palms long, or even up to 10 palms. A man once came to me whose was 10 palms long. When you cut it, insert a probe into the hole and pierce it all the way to the bottom so that everything comes out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And let the matter inside be emptied, and apply medicines at the site to prevent rotting for several days, then treat it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle or foot joint, and there are many holes from which blood flows;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Therefore, treat him as we have said previously.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	In our land this disease is called 'cattle disease'; it often affects oxen, and it is caused by a small worm that grows between skin and flesh. It moves throughout the body, ascending and descending, felt distinctly as it moves from limb to limb, leaving behind sores when it departs.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by corruption of certain bodily humors, such as worms, serpents, leeches, and roundworms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and there is doubt about its severity, for when it reaches the head and enters the eye, it may cause blindness.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	This happens frequently.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see one being treated or bled, one can only be sure that it is happening when the worm moves:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	Therefore, tie the spot above and below with a strong, tight bandage, then cut into it and bleed it. If the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, cauterize the wound with fire until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greatest harm that it causes is that it tears the eye, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	If you see it coming near the eye's head, press down on the eyebrow strongly and then cut above it with fire.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And the patient should use bodily cleansing with dissolving medicinal solvents to remove harmful humors, and beware of putrid foods causing corruption.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called in our land 'vackir,' and it is a pain that comes into some limbs, which then moves from limb to limb.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And I saw what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to see a woman who was ill, and she uncovered her arm for me, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	And shortly after that, it swelled up to her shoulder like living silver moving from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain then left that spot and settled in her shoulder. Afterwards, it quickly spread throughout her body until it reached her other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then she told me that she was always turning around her body as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	"I wondered greatly how the member could move about so from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness behave in such a way."
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Yet nevertheless, I had often seen many who seemed to want to move their limbs from one place to another, but I had never seen this in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, which is why that constraint appeared
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	but they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, having moist bodies and concealed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see this illness being treated and the patient feels that pain which we have described, then quickly place the hand above and below, and then strike with a knife until that constrained wind emerges from its place.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the spot;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And if you cannot see it with your eyes, then treat those that expel winds, such as fetid pills and pills of serpentine, etc.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their likenesses and according to the places on the body where they enter.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The varieties of them are such that there are those with large points, small ones, hairy ones, and smooth ones.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And there are some with two angles, others with lengths, and still others where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	Those which fall upon any limb fall in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Either they fall onto a principal member such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When one falls upon any place on these members, the signs of death that I will tell you about appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	You must then be aware of extracting this arrow, as many deaths follow from various situations.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And if these signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	The signs of an arrow striking the brain and piercing bone include: when the eye socket on top of the head jumps out, there is darkness and heaviness and restlessness in the eyes, redness of the whites of the eyes and inflammation of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting bile.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	And perhaps without cause, it runs from the nostrils or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And perhaps suddenly loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And moist white matter like flesh spurts from the wound, and it also appears as bruised flesh.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	If these signs appear to you, then take care of the case, and remove the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of an arrow striking the heart are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were struck into something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And perhaps the arrow moves like a bird, black blood comes forth, and coldness and cold sweat come on, followed by fainting;
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Then know for certain that the man is dead.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of a splinter that has lodged in the lung is when without any foam coming from the wound, phlegm rises up to the throat, and the patient changes color, sighs loudly, and seeks cool air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow strikes the covering of the belly, it is near the lower ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and it causes great pain and sorrow and sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and all the members of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the splinter falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested food will come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the splinter falls into the belly and no wind comes out through the intestines, then there is no hope for a cure or for removal of the splinter.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow strikes the bladder, urine spurts forth and there is fever, and the patient feels great pain;
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that wounds are deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members such as the face and neck and throat and shoulders and arms and back and thighs and legs and similar limbs are spared according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the splinter is in a nerve or an artery and it is not venomous, as happened to me once which I will tell you about so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened at home to one struck by an arrow in the root of the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and drew it out on the other side under the fat of the ear, without causing any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I drew out an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye under the skin, and the arrow was stuck, and I could only reach its point towards the wood, and it was as large as a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The game was healed, and no bad outcome occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arab arrow with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I cut the barbs, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And drew out an arrow at home that had fallen into the belly, thinking he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	And after he had passed 30 days, his condition did not change.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut upon the arrow, extracted it, burned it with fire, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man into whom an arrow has fallen on his back, and the wound has closed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remained inside him, without changing its natural position or causing harm to any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if you see another man into whom an arrow fell in his face, and the wound closed over;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and it remained there without causing him great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	And many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And an arrow was extracted from the neck of one of the king's men-at-arms, into whom it had fallen and which was slightly inclined towards the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was completely buried.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called for to treat him three days after it had fallen.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I sought her with all my subtlety, yet I did not feel her at all;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pain and discomfort beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow I applied a plaster with atractive and digestive ingredients because the wound did not inflame;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and then the head of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the plaster again the next day, and the wound closed up again, and the patient remained like that for a long time until he felt the arrowhead on the inside of his nose.
et il le me dist.	and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied a caustic medicine to the wound for many days until it was opened up and I probed it and felt the tip of the arrowhead sticking out.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then by applying this medicine on the opening of the wound, the head of the arrow became visibly apparent;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it was more than four months later that the wound opened up enough for me to insert forceps and pull on either side of the arrowhead, but I could not remove it;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Therefore I did not cease to refine and devise ways of tools until I obtained good pliers one day according to the form that will come at the end of this chapter, so that I could pull it and heal the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient became entirely healthy.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you can base your treatment on what I have not mentioned, for books cannot cover everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But wise masters compare even small things, and find new works and new tools when things are present or lacking according to the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows exit from the limbs where they are stuck in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either through the place where they enter, or through another part.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And the one that jumps out where it enters is an arrow entering flesh, and sometimes jumps out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh around it can be cut away, and then the dislocation should be reduced.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it thus for a few days and move it each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then if it jumps out; but if not, carefully cut around the whole joint until the place is widened, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if an arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and reaches one of the ventricles of the brain, some of the symptoms that I mentioned may appear to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	So do not pull it out but leave it until it becomes even after a few days, because if the arrow reaches such a place, death will occur.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not go too deep, and the patient remains for some days without bad symptoms, then try to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply stuck and cannot come out thus, then apply warm poultices around it as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the joint until it is sound.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrowhead has gone in deep so that one cannot see it, search for it carefully along its entire track;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then draw it out with some suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, even though there is no bone, nerve, or vein involved, then widen the wound until it is large enough;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and draw out the arrowhead if you can; and if there are barbs on it that prevent its removal, then cut away the flesh stuck into both parts of the wound until you can remove the arrowhead by breaking or bending its barbs;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And take care not to break the arrowhead as you draw it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	"And if you cannot pull it out all at once, leave it until the flesh around has rotted away, and then pull it out; for extraction will be easier."
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if bleeding is heavy and causes concern, then follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	And guard against cutting into nerve or vein, and devise some way by which you might gently pull out the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or carefully;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And place the patient in the same position they were when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then place them according to the signs shown to you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	An arrow that comes from another side, where some part of it is visible or the skin is swollen there, may be felt around about:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Then cut until forceps can grasp it and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	If one shoots now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	"And if it is held in the bone, rotate your hand around until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out."
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and resume the extraction later until it comes out:
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if the shaft of the arrow is there, burn all the shaft;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	And if the shaft falls off and you see that cauterizing is necessary, then apply the heated instrument such that the tip of the arrow enters into the heat of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And then apply fire, and if the arrow is struck, insert the pointed instrument inside to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrowhead is embedded, you must cut all around where the venom is, if possible, then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	If the arrow falls into the thigh or belly or bladder or side and it is near, you can reach it with your hand; if you do.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware not to touch the vein or nerve; then extract it and stitch the wound if necessary
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	"The shape of the tweezers used to remove arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is the illustration:"
Et en sont mout de manieres:	There are many ways for this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrow's feathers is like those of a bird, to attach at the tip of the arrowhead, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	"The shape of the tweezers for grasping and pulling out is like this:"
des voinnes dou cors communes	"for common wounds of the body,"
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are 31 veins from which one bleeds, among which there are sixteen at the head, namely
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	The two temporal arteries located behind the ears, called the "doubles 'herb'";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries visible in the two temples
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins located at the inner corners of the eyes, called "aspirates";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	the vein located in the forehead
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	And the vein which is at the head of the nose.
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	And the two jugular veins on the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins above the mouth's lips, which are called 'augueric'.
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	And two veins under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The commonly known veins in each arm are five:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	The first is the cephalic vein, which lies on the right side and is called 'vein of the head' by laypeople;
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	The second is called 'fast', it's composed of the cephalic and the basilica veins, and laypeople call it 'vein of the heart';
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And the basilica vein lies on the left side, which laypeople call 'vein of the belly', it's above the flexor muscles and is the one visibly seen in the elbow pit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the salvation vein lies between the little finger and ring finger with two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	And in the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	The first is beneath the curvature of the pouch on the left side, and the second is at the ankle on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the vein called 'nesse', which is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins beneath them.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The discharge from veins that are near the ears helps with old cataracts and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	And the qualities of the discharge are such that you should raise the patient's head and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then instruct the patient to turn their neck towards a vise until the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent locations on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	then grasp them with your thumb and index finger where you feel the pulse beneath your fingers, and squeeze gently;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet and insert it beneath the vein until it reaches the bone, then lift your hand upstream along the vein, cut through skin and vein twice with a single stroke, and let blood flow out until you see it;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then stretch and bind it until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples is beneficial for migraines, both acute and chronic, and for customary ophthalmia, and for watery tears flowing from the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the qualities of this healing are as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and that the patient holds his neck so that both veins appear clearly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And feel the pulse under your thumb, and then press firmly
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lift the heart upwards towards the vein on your index finger, place the lancet underneath it, and raise the vein upwards to cut it, just as you have done with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then release the patient, place your hand on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then bind it tightly and leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have spoken of their dislocations and extractions at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding from the frontal vein is just as useful as that from the temporal vein for treating ancient face pains and headaches.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its quality is such that the patient twists their neck so much that the veins appear.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the tool called 'fosseur', of which here is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein and press with your hand or something else, allowing blood to flow out according to the amount you desire.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then release the patient's neck and tie the vein until it stops bleeding, at most once with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	Nevertheless, care must be taken that the bandage is not too tight.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	And bind diagonally, for the bone is nearby and the bandage may break if it is too thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The bleeding from the two veins that are in the temples helps with eye pain, and with headache, redness, earache, and face diseases.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their injury is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting it in some direction, as mentioned before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the wound, and if the wound is transverse, a bit long and wide due to the flame, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flame is subtle, it may sometimes break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then let blood flow until you need to, and then bind with cotton, binding it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	Wounds from a vein near the nose are good for agues, and violent fevers, and facial diseases, like migraines and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is chronic;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	And the quality of the wound is such that the patient strains their neck, then holds their nose with your left hand, and takes a subtle flame that is long, and sticks it into the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and blood will now begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not go too deep at all; let blood flow according to your need, then bind it overnight, for it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the form of fire:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The urine of two goats helps with the extraction of splinters and the beginning of measles, and aids many illnesses, including leprosy, corrosion, and hernias.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the properties of urine are such that the patient holds their neck under both [goats], as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	And let the master stand on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a seat; then open the vein a little widely, then let blood flow temperately, as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then perform the other half on the other vein; then untie the bandage, and press gently around both veins so that the patient does not faint;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the washing of limbs
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bloodletting of the veins above the lips helps with colds in the mouth, gum decay, cracked lips, and the nose and around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the treatment is to make the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the lip up, and look at two veins, one on the right lip and one on the left, which are recognizable by their black color and the small black veins around them:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	So cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them or are uncertain, then cut the largest one on each side. Do the same for the two veins that are above and below, as this is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the washing under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The treatment of the veins under the tongue aids after treating the cephalic vein, for strained throat and diseases of the eye and mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of the treatment is that the patient sits facing you in sunlight, lifts their tongue up, and looks for a black vein under each side.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Health then both (joints), and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the arm that are commonly treated are done so in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	Either by pricking with a wide-bladed lancet or by incising with a sharp olive-shaped blade, known as an "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And are large and sharp according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the round flame is very well-known, and it is wide as you see:"
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	It is necessary for opening the scalp veins that are full of visible thick blood, which contain thick and turbid blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And this is the shape of the olive-shaped blade:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	"And it is more subtly pointed and is for cauterizing the subtle veins where there is subtle citrine blood."
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps those who are ill in the chest, throat, neck, and belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the bloodletter to perform the bloodletting correctly, and to beware of the artery that lies underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he strikes the artery and bleeding begins, he must stop it as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And the flame must not be piercing, but cutting like a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilic does not open visibly, you must remove it and replace it with another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you want any vein from it, or you sinew in place of it the vein within the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens visibly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And cut with the flame like a knife, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to know the location of the sinew, then before you remove the arm, you must touch the location until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the location beforehand, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with the flame like a knife;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	And be sure not to wound the artery when you see the location swollen, for it is of the artery:
eschui la donques.	avoid this then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see urine-like fluid coming out on top, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten yourself then, and place your thumb firmly downwards; once you have done so, remove your thumb if blood oozes out, as this often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Tie the arm tightly, leave it thus, and do not let the patient move it
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be in fear; do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	But if the blood does not ooze out and you faint, and no physician is present; then cut the artery if it opens, for the head withdraws.
et estainche li sans.	and stop the bleeding
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a piece of fig bark, cut it open, and take half of it and tie it securely until the next day
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if the bleeding stops, that's good
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If not, then treat it with powders that stop bleeding, as we have mentioned
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the stainings are not considered serious in many cases due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The washing of the vein in mid-air helps by drawing blood from above the head and below the body; for it is composed of basilisk and celandine, as we have said
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	And it is necessary for the surgeon to warn him about the nerve that lies underneath, and if he cuts too deep, and finds the nerve, and inflames it, then the limb may be disabled.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	And this nerve is often exposed, but in some men it remains hidden due to its fineness; therefore, you should heal it with the surgical hook before cutting.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And flee from the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	"And if there is a vein between the two nerves, split it lengthwise."
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The cauterization of the temporal artery helps by drawing blood away from the head and assisting with eye problems.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to cauterize with the olive-shaped flame or the myrtle-shaped flame, for this is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries underneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, one should seek the easiest place and not hesitate to try again if one fails at first.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And sometimes the area may swell in some people when one fails at first, but it is of no concern.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	"The quality of cauterization depends on your skill."
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about health is that health is maintained foremost to preserve health and to avoid future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	And health should be practiced in one of the three veins which are located on the arm:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	namely, the cephalic, basilic, and median cubital.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And bloodletting should be performed at the start of Lent, during autumn and winter after meals, when signs ofpletion appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	Bloodletting should be done on the first or third day, two or three hours after noon.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	Bloodletting administered for illnesses has no fixed time, but when necessary it should be done at any hour or time of day.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Children should not be bled until they are fourteen years old, nor women except during the fourth month after childbirth up to the seventh day.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	"Nor should one cauterize the elderly who have passed sixty years of age."
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting in any manner, they must first cleanse the bowels with a gentle enema if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw harmful impurities from the bowels into the main limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	He who is overly salty from foods, or drunkards, even if they are feverish, cannot be cured.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if one desires to be cured after a bout of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, menstrual flow, labor pains, sleeplessness and fasting, or any loss of strength due to injury or illness.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then refine the humors by eating and drinking appropriately, if you have that power;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then enter a bath if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood and heal the vein around the third rib, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And guard against work, overeating, lust, and similar things that day
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	And be at rest and joyful, with the healer standing higher than the patient being healed. Then rub the arms twice or thrice, then loosen the belt in the middle, for when it is too tight or short, blood cannot flow properly.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then he rubs the joint with his hands until the veins swell, which can be felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	He then moistens the burning forceps with a drop of old oil, places his left-hand thumb on that vein below the joint where he wishes to cauterize, ensuring that the vein is not empty or collapsed before striking.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flee like strings when cauterized, and some are so full of windiness that when the burning forceps is placed upon them, they withdraw at once and cannot be opened.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if he opens the vein, then the wound will be too narrow, so the cauterizer must be wise in such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens on the first attempt, that's good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	But if not, he should begin again a little below or above that joint, if the joint is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the place is swollen, and the patient is afraid, let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	perhaps abscesses will form there
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not put him in a bath, then continue the treatment if he wishes
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the hole is small, or blood flows thinly and you doubt whether it bleeds enough, then insert in that same hole all at once directly
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	And do this quickly before the area becomes swollen.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for often it happens that wounds are small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the area swollen, do not continue the treatment and put on a little oil-lees, for it lightens the body of blood and is gentle in this place the lees of oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And administer oil-lees in each treatment of veins that you treat, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And this same occurs with the head of the shoulder joint, when it is put back in its place
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	so subtly lets the blood flow and disperses it when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if a large abscess forms, which often happens, especially when the vein is not properly cauterized at the time of opening it and the incision is small, then hurry and apply a warm, moist sponge made from water and silk for about an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you must do this after the flow of blood from the vein has stopped, and if it remains in its place for a few days without any blackness or greenness, then there is no harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see this, apply some aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, balm, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often an abscess and swelling appear at the site of cauterization
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find that the spot is soft to the touch when pressed, then this appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Thereupon, take care not to place anything on what we have said, for by chance it may cut the artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	But use dry linen bandages to toughen the area, then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	"And draw from each according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood."
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it thick, let it flow until it thins.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	It is necessary for one who is full and bloated, and needs bloodletting, to make the incision larger, so that the flow of blood is wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for one who is weak, do the opposite; it is necessary to bleed frequently and carefully, cutting across rather than pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	This method of bleeding prevents loss of blood and damage to nerves, and is better than long or wide incisions.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And to one whose body fails at digestion, it is necessary to give soft bread in juice of pomegranates.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is overheated, then draw blood three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, let him eat before digestion soft bread in musk syrup, or in syrup of aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints after losing much blood, then he must drink broth of meat and fragrant subtle syrup, and use the other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope for vein evacuation.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	"And if he wishes to empty one arm and bleed elsewhere another time, when he is weakened by much bleeding, it is necessary that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his continued strength."
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	"And whoever wishes to empty one arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong body, should bleed again 24 hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour."
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	"And whoever wishes to bleed elsewhere should bleed on the second or third day."
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	But he has much blood within his body which is already overheated, and causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Therefore it is necessary to draw out a large quantity [of blood], and to widen the incision until it flows freely.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then when you have prepared all the conditions for digestion, and place your hand on the pulse while it digests, take care that the patient does not come in place of the pus, for this happens many times when the digester is careless;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And do not allow the hand to untie the bandages too quickly, nor let blood flow a second time when the incision is closed; press firmly upon it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If he is bent, let him straighten his arm quickly, for this would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it be until the second time he recovers;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or else prick with the tip of fire until the frozen blood inside the vein comes out, then put some lint soaked in water on it and press lightly
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	"And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not compress it until the swelling has subsided."
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	"And if there is need to draw blood a second time, then bleed in the same vein or in another vein or in the other arm."
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	"The veins of the arm are bled instead of the cephalic vein because they are composed [of many small veins]."
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way to heal is for the patient to put their hand in warm water until the joints are red
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then bind it moderately so that the vein appears well; then cauterize now across, not too wide nor too long
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the prick be large; and cauterize well near the joint of the hand; and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand back in warm water and let enough blood run into the water
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, because one puts it more in winter than in summer
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the blood of this vein is safer than all others, for there are neither arteries nor nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The blood from the vein on the right hand's palm is beneficial for all liver diseases, and this is how it should be done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Stretch out the hand, and place it in warm water until the vein swells enough to be visible.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the vein is crossed, and you cut along its entire length without hesitating, there will be no harm done.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And do not cut too deep, for nerves lie beneath all veins devoid of flesh. Then place the hand back in warm water if the blood is coagulated in the wound and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	"And once you have removed as much blood as necessary, then place oil and lint on it to seal it quickly, and do the same for each wound."
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	"The urine from the left hand is good for treating mousse disease, and do everything as I have told you regarding the right hand."
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The balm of the phoenix is beneficial for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menses, and disease of the loins, and of the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	The quality of this blood is such that when the patient places their foot in warm water and rubs it onto the vein until it disappears, they should tie above the ankle joint.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	This vein is located at the ankle, and many nerves pass over it higher up on the foot.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Saw through then the bone where thicker it is, or at the ankle joint, whichever you prefer.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you saw through it above the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath, and saw it across as in cutting a stick.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flame be oblique
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	"And if blood cannot flow out, then immerse the foot in water and allow the vein to empty well."
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the sawing fails on the first attempt, then begin again a little higher up, for the place is salted.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not fear damaging the nerve, as we have said, and do likewise to the shinbone of the other leg equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	"The scar of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle, and its urine is beneficial for treating hip pain when it's due to hot blood."
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the qualities of sawing it are that the patient enters into a bath, and is held above the ankle joint with four twists, for otherwise the vein will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then saw through in all ways you can, and crossing
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	It is better that you cut it off, for the place is dry, and it is very responsive to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you don't find it, then take any vein of hers that opens on her thigh towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and draw out as much blood as you see fit, then untie the bandage, and place cotton over it and tie it tightly.
ele est maintenant sanee.	she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	removals by cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or earthenware, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And cupping (ventosation) is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping that is done without striking has two methods:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is with fire throughout, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	And cupping that is done by striking and bloodletting is performed on fourteen parts of the body, one of which is entirely on top of the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and another is in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	And two others are on both sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	And the cupping glass under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	And the bloodletting cups of the two shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the bloodletting cup on the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	And the bloodletting cups between the two arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	And the bloodletting cups of the two legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	And the bloodletting cups of the two ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And bloodletting does not draw blood except from the small veins that are dispersed throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken at all, unlike bloodletting from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it should not be applied, neither by fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from excess, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if it becomes necessary to perform bloodletting due to illness or custom, we will apply it once at the beginning and once at the end of each month.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they need bloodletting, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And some find excess and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness before the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And such ones who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have an inflamed tongue, and spew blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And there are also those who dream, and see in their veins blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially during the month of May, we order cupping to be performed after three hours of the day."
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The sweat of the forehead aids in relieving the heat that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary for this to occur after all of the body has been evacuated.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this sweating is in place of the sweat from the forehead, and it is not necessary for those who are of cold temperament to use it, or those with a cough, as this causes them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And therefore, old people should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their heads.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often cauterize themselves become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping jar a little further down to avoid forgetfulness."
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	Sweating in the neck is equivalent to sweat from the head and back, and it is beneficial for tightness of the chest, splitting of the channel of the lung, coughing, andpletion.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And one must apply heat gently, for if it is applied too forcefully, it could cause injury to the stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	And wind evacuations from the ribs of the neck are useful for headaches and eyestrain, migraine, strangury, and toothache pain, and they are in place of a purge.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And you must instruct the surgeon not to compress the artery nor cause blood flow during cutting.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	And evacuations below the chin are useful for mouth diseases and gum decay, and similar mouth ailments.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	And they serve as substitutes for purging of both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Cupping on the shoulders is beneficial for illnesses caused by heat andpletion."
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	And evacuations on the ribs are as useful as three veins in the arm, because they draw blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Instruct the surgeon not to proceed too deep, for the spot is devoid of flesh and lies beneath nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass that is placed on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids and illnesses below; it is necessary that the cupping glass be large and made of brass, so that it may draw well.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if it were thin, it would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	And it makes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	Leg cupping glasses heal openly because they draw blood from the whole body and are useful for old pains in the back, sciatica, and the bladder; they also reset dislocations.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are placed on the two thighs and the two ankles; moreover, they weaken the body after prolonged use and cause dizziness in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The method of placing the cupping glass is to place it first empty and suck temperately; then place it quickly and move it evenly without stopping until you see the area turn red and inflamed and appear the redness of blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then burn it, and remove the cupping glasses, and take care with the arrangement of the body, for there are some who have thin flesh, and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	If it is necessary to strike only once, then wide and somewhat deep cuts must be made;
et suce legierement.	and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the blood is thick, then one must strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	The first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very dense, then one must strike a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And when we wish to draw out only a little blood, once will suffice.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we wish for much blood, then we repeat often.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the blood is dense, strike deeply, and stop when the heart has been suddenly pierced. This applies to those with thick skin and hard flesh who have narrow pores: you must anoint the places for cupping glasses with permeating and dissolving oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is in place, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of pumpkin seed.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is in joint, with mustard oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, then take bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one whose flesh is tender and has wide pores is treated, there should be no point of oil applied, but it should be washed afterwards with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucurbit water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who are very moist should rise using myrtle water, sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or water of the sun, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or others similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	And one must not use a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he warm himself when he must be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware those who are being treated have hot temperaments, and if the blood is too thick and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	then they should take cold things like pomegranates, endive, lettuce with garlic, and similar foods.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And eat pork meat, castrated ram meat, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have cold complexions should take syrup of honey and moderate aromatic wine, which is between old and new, and eat roast pork and roast pork meat and small birds and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day when he evacuates, he should drink more than he eats;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And some people should be given treacle or muscat three times before evacuation, or afterwards, to strengthen the main members.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And let the blood be subtly drawn, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cups that are placed without wounding are those placed on the liver, womb, gout, belly, face, back and thigh, for these members do not tolerate being wounded above them, and they are only used to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on the breasts when a woman is in labor.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	To remove the viscosity in the limb, as we place cupping glasses on the abdomen and cheek to reduce the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and relieves pain when there is a stone or gallstone, as it can attractively remove by its power through suction the stone, or dislodge the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and likewise it does when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered with fire together, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in diseases of the lungs, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of administering the cupping glass with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And let it be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have around the middle a small hole, like that for a needle, made of brass, soft before use so that it does not wound the patient when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	And it should have in its midst a crossbeam of bronze or iron, to place an enclosed candle upon, and they (the candles) should be both large and small according to the illnesses and the ease of those who use them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the elderly, and for the thin they are different from those for the fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should thus place this cupping glass upon the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Insert the candle made of wax or linen, and place it within the cupping glass across the crossbeam that is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass where it cannot burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it upon the limb, and ensure that the opening we spoke of is above, so that when you want to, steam can escape, and one removes the cupping glass;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And again insert the linen wick as before, and keep relighting it often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	Therefore in the cupping glass prepared for pleurisy with sharp pain, it has no crossbeam or opening; and it is only heated when filled with water, then placed upon the limb.
et c’est li forme:	And this is its shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction cups cannot be applied except in limbs where one cannot place them due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in areas devoid of flesh, such as the knees or nose, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	And its usefulness is that when you find suction cups that are clean and bright with no signs of use, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place them in warm water until they are swollen and have nothing inside.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then disinfect the vein and suction cup, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the cups on.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are full and dropping, if it is a place where one can put a suction cup, then put one on, for this is very useful afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the limb gently, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the wound heals too quickly after bleeding, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the blood congeals.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the blood is multiplied, apply ground vitriol or gauls ( oak galls ), or similar substances until it coagulates.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or you can place half a handful of peeled beans on the wound and leave them there until they adhere to the wound; it will now stop bleeding.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the veins do not want to take blood, rub fresh blood on the wound and stick a needle into it until blood flows out; then apply the cloths so that they adhere once they sense the blood.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see them full, powder some alum and salt ground together or ashes on top of them; they will now clot.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	"Here begins the book of fractures"
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that foolish physicians scorn this chapter because they have never seen any of the old books nor read any letters concerning it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason, knowledge is scarce in our land, for I found none of it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have learned the knowledge, and through experience, and through my life's practice.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	I have described for you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are arranged, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	"It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of words and chapters where the wise puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are skilled know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or crushing occurs in anyone, you should hasten to bandage the patient on both sides, except if there is anything preventing it entirely, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the time is not very hot, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	And drink cold drinks, that is to say, cold foods, and bird meat and hare meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty meats, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you doubt a hot abscess, or an expansion of matter in the limb.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient returns to their first good governance which they have used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that you feed the sick person with foods that promote growth and viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, milk, wine, and similar things."
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	"For with this nourishment muscles are rebuilt more quickly and the fracture heals sooner."
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of the elderly and infirm cannot be properly reset or mended according to their natural state due to the weakness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	But if there is no cure, reset and bind with thick bandages the broken bone tightly until it heals as before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And do not let any point of its work remain undone, for this reason they must be nourished with plenty of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	"And know that fractures are diverse in many ways."
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	"For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the arm or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways that fractures can occur."
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	"For there are fractures that go to the bone and others that do not affect the bone, such as cutting off the tip of a quill for writing."
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	"And there is fracture with wound, and fracture with just a small crack."
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each manner has its own tool and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings back into place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	A break in the bone is recognized by the twisted appearance of the limb, and it can be clearly felt by touch when pressed with the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And if there is no twisting or sound on touching, nor does the patient feel great pain, then there is no break present.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it may well have curvature, or cracking, or minor fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	"So do not move the limb by hand, but apply the medicines that are mentioned below and then gently immobilize it."
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break which goes into the air, and consists of two disjointed parts, must be set evenly before a swelling comes.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if a swelling soon comes, let it remain for some days until the swelling is pacified;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then set it evenly with the movement you can easily and gently make, for know that the restoration of this one is easier than those which have pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then bind it as it must be done afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are pieces broken, stretch them out with two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small member, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are dislocated, you should reset them all with all your strength in their places with the movement you can make, and ensure that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And join the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with your hand if it seems not to be properly set:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If you raise it nicely and do not pull it too hard or press too much, as those who bring about heat and contraction to the limb through their practice of cautery, as we have often seen:
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is set, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning nor in any other manner;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For if it feels any pain, then it is not set properly, and you must place it in such a position that it feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	And make sure it is placed correctly, so that there are no twists when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	The qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	"Know that broken limbs are diverse in size, length and shape."
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	Because there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	therefore, soft and fine linen cloths should be used to wrap them.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	And those that are large, such as thigh and leg
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	should be wrapped in a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandage encases the entire large limb evenly, and presses it equally on all sides so that there is no gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then wrap it around with light pads, three or four times according to the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on all the bandage, then go above the break and tighten less so that the break can move away from the break a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and slowly loosen the bandage bit by bit until you grasp most of the healthy part, then take another bandage and wrap it around again on the broken limb.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the break and tighten it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first binding above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the limbs wads of linen or rags, so that it is entirely even; then bind everything above with bandages, and then place well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something that cools and draws out the heat of the abscess, and reduces swelling, leaving it thus for several days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then press down on your dressings, using something about half the width of a large cane, properly trimmed, or wooden battens used for stakes, or palm ribs, and they should be shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But the dressing placed on the fracture must be a little thicker and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And it should also be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then press down on the dressings just as you did with the first binding, then tie above it evenly, just as in the first binding over the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	Further above is narrower; suddenly less.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	And it is necessary that the threads be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their sutures from twisted linen ropes, and this is a great error, because the suture cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two spaces between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the stitches after they were placed in the healthy places, then put pieces of linen or wool gauze underneath them so that they do not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to stitch all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	But when the limb is large, you should not put in stitches before after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your sureness of the heat of the abscess;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	And here you will find the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And take the flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of eggs, and this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, use it for setting fractures in various positions, especially for women and young children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of plaster restoring breaks, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take incense and ladanum and mullen and asafetida and gum arabic and magnesia, nine parts.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloe, five parts.
alechil VIIII З.;	aloes, seven parts.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	And grind it into powder, then mix with egg yolk
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the constitution of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of plaster that is beneficial for twists:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take magnesia and malva (mallow), nine parts each.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloe, seven parts each.
acaice VI З.;	acacia, six parts
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	bolus armeniac (arsenic trioxide), ten parts, grind well and mix with vinegar or egg yolk, then administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method of plaster for joints and bones out of their places, and alleviates the pain that ensues, and prevents bone growth and breaking:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new linen, wetting it with hot water and oil, then apply to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore but is good for soothing a hot boil and properly removes pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way of setting broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and common mallow leaves, grind them together to make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to soften the remains of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take equal parts of the following:
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Grind them together and mix with wine. If the limb is inflamed, mix it instead with coriander water or plain water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another stronger plaster for when a hard abscess comes to restore the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take equal parts of the following:
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Grind them together and mix with saltwater, fresh water, or wine according to the warmth of the limb and its restfulness.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should only apply on the broken limb for restoration a cerate made of wax and oil, nothing else more. He says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen agrees that one should apply on the broken limb for restoration dry things somewhat warm, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way for poultices that are good for wounds and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take an equal amount of mullein flowers, chicken feathers or human hair, and valerian root. Grind them together to make a poultice.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then after dislocating it a little later, take care if the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	unless it remains dislocated for many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain or itching comes on, without rest or swelling, then act quickly and dislocate it again, removing the obstacle immediately.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take light cloth and a damp sea sponge, dip it in water, and lift it to the spot until the itching ceases and the pain is eased.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, dampened with water or rose oil, and bind it tightly until you are sure of having produced a warm abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and once the pain is gone, then begin the gentle binding again, with a little more pressure this time, but not as strong as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and continue thus until it heals.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the swelling is hot and red and painful and swollen are all gone, and you need plaster and binding again, then begin again gently, just as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if there comes to the limb none of what we have said, then do not dislocate it except after three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And sometimes leave it for twenty days, as is seen, until the fracture heals and the union of flesh approaches.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	Then tighten more than before, and let the flesh grow thick, as I have said earlier;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	And if you see that the place dries out more than necessary, know that no healing will come from it.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Then apply warm water compresses all the times you dislocate it, and this should be done every third day, and loosen the bandage a little.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Thus healing of the limb is accelerated, and swiftly corrected what foolish doctors do, who reset the limb incorrectly:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	This is evil, and such work is fearful, and I see nothing else but doubt and working correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of diverse kinds of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many kinds of fractures there are, and various shapes, and their causes are distinct;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are fractures caused by the blow of a sword, and the collarbone breaks the entire bone up to the shoulder blade which is beneath the bone, like an axe or log;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	And therefore this type of fracture is called "haiche.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this type of fracture is called "absolute.
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And in these two fractures the wound may be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	"And if there is percussion that strikes in, or cuts into, the collarbone of stone, or from falling onto stone, or other similar ones."
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	"And if there is a persistent fracture, approaching close to the membrane that is under the bone or over it, and this wound is large or small."
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	Also there is a fracture where the wound enters the bone so subtly like a hair, and the split is small; therefore this fracture is called "capillary.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling or similar cause, and pushes in the piece of bone downwards, causing the place to be raised like a roofer striking slates on a roof;
si entre li piere dedens.	If the stone enters within the kidneys.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their heads, such as children's heads;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it occurs with all types of fracture where small pieces are dislodged like stars;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	I will speak about it in its proper place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	"And we know all kinds of fractures by their retraction upon them, and detection through probing, and by the corrupt flesh that is upon them."
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary appearance is known by this: when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on top, then the fracture opens black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, beware of accidents to the patient. And if you see no evil accident such as vomiting of bile and loss of consciousness and extension and paleness and intermittent fever and eyes coming out black and red and other signs in various conditions, then it cannot heal without doubt
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any astonishing accident and hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounded person first comes to you, if it is in wintertime, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summertime, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the flesh under the bone becomes corrupted and the accidents that we have spoken of occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone extends to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must cut into the broken part like this:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	And take the patient's head and uncover the bone in all possible ways, and do so gently according to the shape of the wound; if blood flow or a hot abscess occurs when uncovering the bone, help as necessary; then fill the place with wool moistened with rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	And let the wound rest until the hot abscess is appeased, and ensure that there is no further bleeding;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then begin to remove around the bone; this can be done in two ways:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One manner is thus: you cut narrowly and straight ahead, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another incision larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And another manner is thus: you have many cuts of diverse shapes, some narrow and pointed, others wide and made of soft iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work lightly so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and strong, you must encircle it with a drill before administering cuts with awls, ensuring they do not pierce too deep and go beyond the bone's soft part; above the point there should be a margin or circle that prevents the point from protruding beyond the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you must have many such awls so that each comes into its proper place on the edge of the bone, thus allowing you to have awls for all kinds of bones.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three manners of awls:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The qualities for drilling around a broken bone are that you place the drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know the bone is drilled through.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then move the cautery elsewhere a little later, and do so all around; then cut with the scalpel the space of bone that is between the pores, doing this more subtly and gently than you can, so that you draw out the bone to your hand, or to any of the tools that you have such as tongs, forceps.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And ensure that you do not touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, then you must reset the fragment that remains of the bone with another tool resembling a scalpel, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other scalpel;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	And if any small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with one of your tools.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Then dress the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another method of work is that which Galien speaks of, which is more cautious;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and tie it very tightly, that is his order.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture appears open, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place underneath the head of this lens-shaped chisel, its shape is shown here:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut on one side only; the bone is sharp on both sides so that the cut is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small hammer so that you gently tap the bone all around; and be careful of the tissue underneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is adherent to the bone, remove it gently, for one can do so safely without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the tissue and the bone is only cut on top with small pieces remaining, then remove these roughnesses using a fine file that you should have in various quantities to prepare each area according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Then use coarse files first, followed by finer ones until it is smooth enough.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	For each of the other capillary incisions and subtle fractures, you must bring about closure according to its direction;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is not something easily answered by one who has devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the sinew is exposed, you must take one cloth of linen according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth doubled over twice or thrice, wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And do this more gently than you can, so as not to strain the sinew, then apply the other ligature on top and do not pull too hard until it touches the wound only.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	And leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is reduced, then untie it and apply medications such as lily roots, walnut flour, frankincense powder, and aristologus, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	Grind these ingredients into a powder, apply it to the wound, and repeatedly apply warm remedies without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	And ensure that the wound is always clean, leaving no ointment on it or allowing flies to gather on it, for when flies congregate on the brain cloth, they will corrupt and inflame it, causing great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	For when one places something corrosive on the sinew, it will necrose above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, beware if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, that it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness appears on the outside due to the medication applied, which has such virtue, then you must take one part honey and three parts rose oil and mix it with one cloth, and place it on.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him in various ways until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes both parts of the kneecap above are broken, or just one by itself, for these are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and the one below is cartilage and does not break, except when struck from behind or twisted, after which it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must place your little finger or middle finger on the hole of the kneecap and push the break evenly with your index finger from behind until the kneecap returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain because of your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the shoulder and the arm cannot be moved into place, you should put it against the head of a slightly thick stick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is of two parts, then repair it thus, and hasten to restore on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	But if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the inflammation is subdued, then wrap the head of the newly broken bones with linen cloths.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you bind the other part separately, if there is a fracture there
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And let the bandages be so thick that they fill up the hollows of the newly broken bones.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say one must soften the tents with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem good to me that this is right; rather, they should be moistened in a mixture of egg yolk and mill dust
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then leave the bandage on until the bone is solidified and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes feathers from a goose are used instead of bandages, and a soft cloth around them; if the break holds and the patient suffers less.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Do as you see fit
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if swelling comes to the shoulder while you are working on it, put cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil or a little diacodium upon it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not appear, then apply a plaster made of sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk; then apply light compresses, but do not tie it tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the fracture is small and broken into many pieces, then extract it with appropriate tools, then sew up the break and treat with wound healing plasters and ointments as appropriate.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound inside it, then cure it with tenting, and apply splints of lead until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Regarding the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured underneath and there is no wound on the outside, and the break is only on one side with no other fragments inside, it can be easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your two index fingers into the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, put your right hand's two index fingers into the mouth and gently push the fracture in place with the other hand, applying equal pressure.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is offset by two parts, you must provide traction on both sides to ensure that it is aligned evenly.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if movements of the teeth occur, or a fracture, then tie them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place over the broken jaw a dressing, and place over that a double bandage.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place on the bandage a well-made large compress or an equal length and width piece of leather according to the jawbone, tying it at the mouth where you can reach, and instruct the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the figure has changed, then untie it on the third day, and then reposition what was shifted.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And place a plaster over it made from flour ground with abundance of egg or barley meal, after removing the dressing.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And place a light linen over it, and if the plaster dries and there is no change in the patient's condition, leave it until it heals.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times it is healed within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if swelling occurs, use the treatments we have mentioned many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is both fracture and wound together, check whether any piece of bone has been broken off.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If the bone fragments are very small, suitable tools are necessary for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your needs.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing all the fragments, if there is no more remaining, sew up the wound if it is large and apply healing plasters until it is healed.
de la forcele	Regarding dislocations of the joint
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The arm breaks often in front of the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	Either it is broken and dislocated at two places with fragments, which is the easiest to reset;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Or there is fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the procedure for fractures without wounds is: have two assistants so that one can hold the arm which feels the fracture.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then place the fracture evenly on your two hands so that its shape is correct with no deformity or displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round roll of cloth or wool, whose size suits your needs;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And they raise and straighten the arm, holding the spear steady with your hand so as to set the fracture evenly, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	"And if you cannot draw the head of the arm forward because it is too deep, then the patient must lie flat on his back and place under the shoulder a medium ear-pad, and push the shoulder backward until the bone of the fracture rises."
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then align the fracture with your two fingers, and if you find it displaced, then you must cut upon it;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and carefully draw the fragments together, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, then cut one of the incisions that you have made;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but make sure this instrument is placed underneath the arm, for fear of cutting the sinews.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it should resemble a spoon and not be raised, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the power of the work;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it should have two heads, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound that you made when you drew together the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure that there is a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the opening is small or you doubt whether there is heat in the abscess, cover the wound with lint and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	"And if hot swelling comes, wet a piece of linen in rose oil and hyssop and wine, and put it on."
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The binding of the bone, when it is without wounds and cuts, is that you put on the bone the plaster made of mill dust and egg white, and place light dressings on top, and put a splint under the limb if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very wide bandage, about a palm's width, then place the doubled cloth on top of the dressings and plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a narrow strip of linen about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And place the strip on the break, and wrap the bandage around the neck, under the healthy limb, and under the injured limb.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And tighten each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the break securely, and you can clearly see that the strip does not move over the broken bone, then wrap it again every day, and when the ligatures loosen, then tighten it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	And make the patient lie on his back, placing a small pillow under his shoulder while he sleeps to lift the shoulder joint upwards;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	So ease the breakage of the collarbone by lifting the shoulder, tying the arm to the neck if necessary, and not untie it until twenty days have passed, unless some misfortune occurs;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	Then restart the treatment, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it thus until it is healed;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And it will be restored within twenty-eight days for most people, though it may take less time for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	"Regarding the fracture of the shoulder"
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It can happen that the broken or dislocated shoulder does not return to its proper place, and cannot be put back into place except by touch;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	So arrange it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form in every way that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then place on the spot powder from a millstone mixed with plenty of egg whites and light lint, and cover it with a double cloth;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then place over it a wide and thin bandage, slightly wider than the shoulder. If there are any hairs underneath the bandage on some part of the shoulder, then fill that area with linen wads so that the bandage lies evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then fasten it firmly with a large bandage all around so that the bandage does not move from its place. Check the dressing each day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time he moves, tighten it again and ensure that the bandage remains evenly placed if it has shifted from its position. Have the patient lie on their side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder will be restored in 20 days or in 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when these days are completed, then untie it, but be careful, for it is not bone that easily goes out of joint again.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	"And if a piece of bone sticks out in front and not under the heart, then cut it off, and do what we have said regarding the fracture of the arm to appease hot inflammation."
de la brisure dou pis	"Regarding the fracture of the wrist"
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	Sometimes the flesh is broken in half, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	But it often breaks at the joint.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines downward and the patient feels great pain, faints, falls down, and sometimes vomits blood. The horse's jaw opens at the broken bone and they can be felt well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is done by having the patient lie often on their back. Place a cushion between their shoulders, then press their shoulders together and bring the ribs of the two sides gently towards each other with your hands, carefully arranging them so that the bones are properly aligned.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then place compresses and bandages on the fine salt siphon, or another light wood, wrap it in a cloth, and lay it upon the broken bone so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	And bind the tie firmly behind, and tighten gradually, and check each hour to ensure it is secure, and if it loosens, then tighten.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	And if it becomes necessary to untie it, due to corrosion or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or an abscess, then hurry and untie it, remove the compress, and apply remedies as needed.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the compress, and tighten it until it is secure.
de la brisure des costes	"Regarding the fracture of the ribs"
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that a break of the ribs occurs only in large places after the back, and at the head inside, and they bend only because they are smooth.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	And one feels it well during examination.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you align the break as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a splint and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the break of the ribs inclines towards the inside, then the patient feels very great pain and sharpness, also like pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lung;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and it hurts like pricks, and suddenly he vomits much blood, which is of great seriousness; the ancients have spent much effort on this.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	"And there are those who say that one should administer foods that inflate the belly to push the fracture outward."
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	"But we do not do this, lest boils come if they have not already done so."
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	"And if it comes to this, then heal it."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And some say that one should put cupping glasses on the spot to suck strongly, which seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	still, there is doubt that the cupping glass will draw out the excesses to the place due to its weak attraction.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	"And some said that one should cover the joint with moist wool soaked in hot oil, and apply bandages between the ribs to make the binding even. Then it should be treated with the cure for pleurisy, meat, and medicines."
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone piercing the lung, and there is doubt for the patient, then one must cut upon the spot of the broken rib, and put an instrument underneath to guard the wound.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut the bone and draw it out gently, and afterwards sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and dress the wound with emplasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if a boil suddenly comes, then put warm woolen cloths soaked in rose oil on it, and place them on the spot;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the boil's location with what is appropriate for boils, and let it lie continuously on the affected side until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	"Regarding the fracture of the neck"
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a bone in the neck breaks, and rarely does it lean;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	And also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And if this happens to someone and you want to know whether he will recover or not, take note if his hands are softened, swollen, and numb, and he cannot move or extend them. When you prick them with a needle, he should not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many ways. If he moves his hands and feels well when they are pressed or pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will recover if care is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if such a thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know whether it is healed or not, take care if the feet are softened, and if the limbs have accidents that are beyond control, and wind and gas are expelled without volition;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when it is placed on its belly, expulsion occurs without volition.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he lies on his back wanting to mount [a horse], then he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Such things are deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	So do not labor in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to them, then the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that if there is a hot boil, you should apply rose oil or egg yolk oil to the spine until it is soothed;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	Then apply one of the comforting and drying emplastes, tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone dislocates, then cover the heart with it.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Remove the bone, then approximate the two lips of the wound if it is large with one stitch, then dress it with ointment around the flesh until it heals.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	And if the joint of the bone is broken, which is called the 'cow's knee', then place your left hand's clenched fist into it and align it with your other hand with all your strength, then apply the emplaste and splint if necessary.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then bind it, and if there is any dislocated bone, set it back in place, remove the bone, and dress the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It can happen that the hipbone is broken, and if this happens, there will be a little lessening of movement in the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And cut with length, inclining towards the partition, causing pain to the patient at that place, prickling, and swelling where it breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the reduction is thus: stretch your hand upwards until you are above the break;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and know which part is broken and its shape;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	If the break is only at the top, then set that break even with it being in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or slopes inward, make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can easily see and treat the fracture.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And once you have set it even, then place a splint on top, then place a wooden or bone wedge on it and hold the break so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and tie beneath the ribs until the binding is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And tell the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if a hot abscess comes, do not touch it until the hot abscess has subsided, and then place what we have mentioned above;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the reduction, holding it as necessary if there is no bad complication.
et c’est li maniere.	And that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder blade
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder blade is what lies between the elbow and the head of the shoulder. If it is broken, then it should be reset according to one of these two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	of which one method is that you take a wooden splint, thick with groats, shaped like this:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two heads with two bands, and fasten them upwards; then have the patient sit on a seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then place the broken arm on the splint until it reaches the axilla, and is held in a concave wooden support; then hang something heavy from it, or have the minister press it downwards;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then the physician should bring the break level with his hands together until the break returns to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his hatchet-blade, and he holds his hand to his neck, then orders two assistants: one takes what is above the break in his hands, and the other takes below at one link, and each extends to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then restrain the sinews beneath the fracture, and above it, and extend each of the helpers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, then you should put one band under the axilla and the other towards the elbow, under the break;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And if the fracture is towards the cost side, then one must gently place the splint without effort, until the fracture is level on the site and on the cost.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then set the fracture evenly as it should be, and bind it, so that no swelling may come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if swelling comes quickly, do not bind it until seven days have passed; then place damp linen soaked in hot oil rose, until the swelling is eased.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then bind it, and the way to bind is thus: place the bandage on the fracture, then bring the arm close to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And place the bandage, and bind it on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in line with the stars, unless something prevents it or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use stars; place a larger and stronger star on the fracture, with two spaces between each star, and let each star be so large that it passes three fingers beyond the fracture on either side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then press on the joints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fractures.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the settling of the joints and their restriction, as we have said, when you reset the broken limb, and if you doubt that the hot abscess will heal, let it be until the seventh day, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then examine each site every three days to ensure that no itching or swelling occurs where the bandage was placed, so that the limb does not suffer injury due to being too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the dislocation, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, then do not remove the bandage until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	And place a flat pillow filled with even wool under the shoulder, and watch every hour of the day or night to ensure that the position of the broken limb does not change or the bandage become loose.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If the patient is cured through medical knowledge, then give them the food that we have mentioned previously, but grind it first.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And when they begin to recover, it should be coarse.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset after 40 days;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	Then, one should untie it and apply baths and ointment medications to bring it back into place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the strapping is tight and swollen, it should remain tied for forty days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Chapter on the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones called the "two fosciles," one of which is small and extends to the elbow joint;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large and is located underneath, towards the little finger;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Sometimes only the large bone breaks, or sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small bone is broken, restoration is easy, and healing occurs quickly;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	But when the large one is broken, healing is difficult, and it causes more pain than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be gently extended and set straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it's the large dislocation, then it must be pulled out more strongly;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	And stretch it out on the cushion; raise your hand pouch higher than the others and lower the little toe; let the patient lie across themselves with the cushion in front of them raised up so they don't suffer any discomfort;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the minister's arm beneath the patient's hand or elbow, and another minister at the other side above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then the surgeon should set it straight according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are any fragments in the break, then put each one back into its proper place; and if there is any excess that cannot be grasped with your fingers, then press upon it lightly as we have said earlier.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if it is with breaking open a wound, I have spoken of this in a separate chapter;
si pren la cure.	So take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of healing, large abscesses appear, then apply a cloth made from rose oil and white wax that is not too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and tie the cloth on gently until the large abscess is soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	Then remove the wax and apply a poultice made from mill flour powder with abundant egg whites; then place bandages on it, making sure that the bandage for breaking open is stronger and somewhat wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	And know that he must have six lines drawn on the arm in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	Whether the break is in one bone or two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	And tighten more above the fracture than elsewhere, and always lessen while setting it apart, as I said at the beginning of the chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	And let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or harsh.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And let the thread used for binding be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the bandage after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident occurs to the limb, such as itching that comes upon the limb, then you must rinse the limb with warm water until that itch is appeased;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb rest without being too tight.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then commence the stretching, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone dislocated, and suchlike things, so treat it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And beware that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight; if so, then loosen it slightly and leave it thus for a few days until the nourishment arrives, then tighten again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release it until 20 days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or if around it swells up later, then he places his hands on his neck and keeps them even; he guards against movement and dislocation, and sleeps on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Know that this dislocation is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and sometimes in twenty, according to the mixtures and temperaments of the humors.
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	This is because on the back of the hand and in both hands there are few breaks, but rather many dislocations.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the fingers of the hand are broken or bent, then the patient should sit crossed-legged, sitting upright and straight before him.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then place his hand on an extended cloth, and the ministers extend the broken bones, aligning them properly until they are well joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And apply the emplaster and bandages, if there is no inflammation; then place a splint according to the size of the affected area;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and wrap it in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the dislocation is around the wrist, make a splint of cloth and instruct the patient to bind it tightly to their broken wrist;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	then wrap it with a long cloth strip, and let the splint be of soft wood about as large as the palm of the hand, binding it securely.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside edge, then it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap it all around the hand, and secure the tie between the two sides.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture comes to any of us on the hip, if it is dislocated, then set it even, as it ought.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	And hold it with the sole of your foot, and if you see fit, place a small upright splint to raise the fracture, and do not move it.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	And if the fracture is in another toe, such as the big toe or one of the others, then set it even and bind it with the sound toe that comes after.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	Or you can tie them all together, whichever seems best, or place an upright splint on it, as for a dislocation of the hip.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And beware in the restoration and arrangement of hot abscesses, and treat those who come there, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Here is the text for "de la cuixe brisie" (for a fractured thighbone):
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The thighbone is often broken, which can be clearly seen when it turns forward or backward.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	And the restoration is done by tying something above and below the fracture.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then each attendant stretches out their bandage evenly on their side.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the dislocation is close to the root of the thigh, then let one ligament be towards the point and the other ligament below the dislocation.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is close to the knee, then let the bandage be near the knee, and extend it downward;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then let the physician align the bone with both hands until it is in its natural position, and then apply the splint, and if an abscess does not form there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool first, then return to your work and treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You must wrap the fracture with one or two hard bandages doubled, and remove any excess material. Then twist the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh. Insert a long thread between the hip and the leg below the knee, bringing the ends of the thread upwards;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then wrap the leg and hip with the bandage again, place supports on both sides of the fracture, and put one support on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then fill the empty space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to make the tension even; then begin binding tightly three or four turns above the break.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	And as you go higher up from the break, decrease the tension gradually.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	Then take both ends of the thread you have placed between the leg and thigh, and tie three knots that are above; then return below to the top of the thread until you reach the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And tighten it so that it does not move from its place; then leave it thus until there is no inflammation or swelling or other similar condition.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if any of these occurs, untie it and address what has come as we have said many times before.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	And if there are pieces of bone that prick out, they must be removed if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	And if it is not possible, then the place should be split open and infection pulled out
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment, as we have said, until he is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the hip is broken in this way when one places splints on it, such as in the shoulder or arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	However, the patient does not limp after restoration done in this manner.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone takes about one month to heal, give or take a few days depending on individual constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Regarding the kneecap
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	You know that in the cruciate ligament of the knee there is rarely a break, but it often stretches.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a fissure or hole, and this happens in all wounds, and even without wounds, which everyone knows.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is when one places what is round on both sides, until it moves together as much as possible;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then place the splint, and if necessary, place a round bandage on it and tighten it as needed, then review all the arrangements we have said for other fractures, such as treating heat and similar injuries;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply to each injury what is necessary until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Regarding bone fractures of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is rightly called 'mustelz', and the other 'foscile';
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And all other fractures happen similarly to those in the arm, and therefore restoration is done similarly to that of the arm, and the work is all one. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns all around.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bone is broken, so turn [it] forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, great pain is felt, and it is clearly seen.
et torne desoz.	And twisted underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then apply traction, align it evenly, and bind the splints evenly.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	But nonetheless, if the break is ugly with many fragments, then traction should be lighter and gentler.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And align it according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	When you have completed your work, then take two smooth bands of wood that encircle the leg on both sides and are as long as the leg from below the knee down.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap one bandage above and another below, tie them in the middle, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left at this joint, which is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And some apply splints the length of the leg made of wood, and place the leg to prevent movement, particularly if there is a wound at the break.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	And move each day the leg to see if there is any heat or other accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the treatment continues until he is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	About the fracture of bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	In the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a bone in the foot is broken and in two pieces, and there occurs only quassure in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken and you see these bones rising above each other, then place this patient's foot on the ground as if he wants to walk, and then put your foot on his where the bones are raised, and press down until they return to their places;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then place the splint and bandages on it, and put under the foot of the patient a small board with two legs, then bind the foot firmly, and wrap cloths around it, and other things that you may need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any bones of the hand broken, restore them, just as we have said for the bones of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and a bit wider, then put under the foot that board which I mentioned earlier, and bind it firmly;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three, or more [hairs] that need breaking, then place an adhesive bandage on each one according to its amount, wrapped in a piece of linen cloth, and secure the wound with a pad beneath the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And let it be placed on top of the wound's head, away from the belly of the foot, so that it may adhere well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And remember not to forget the other things I have mentioned regarding other fractures.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each injury as it deserves.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	About the fracture of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When a woman's hipbone is broken, have her sit down and lean towards the back part, being held there from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	Then fill the woman's hip joint with cotton, adding as much as one stone's weight,
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then lower the woman and raise her back little by little until the cotton begins to rise towards the hip joint, causing the bone to return with the weight of one stone.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do so for about seven days.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	Then the fracture will be restored, and if you see that it is so, take a bladder of a sheep, tie a tube to its opening, and pour the entire contents into the wound.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow forcefully into the tube until the bladder is fully inflated inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The wound will then heal.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the hand of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the thighbone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	But these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who study and practice this art, and may my book be understood.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For a fracture indicates many ways to correctly reset it:
enten le donques.	So listen to them now.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the thighbone, when it is broken, take a goose's feather and insert it into the bone.
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap bandages around it, and let it rest for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	About fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	He who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or the arm or similar, must be healed now, so that the healing that we have mentioned proves it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then rinse it with vitriol, if you don't have anything else, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, if no inflammation occurs.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if inflammation occurs, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the inflammation is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring bad accidents upon it.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing above the exposed heart, then it must be put in place lightly with your hands, with slight traction.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not suitable for placing evenly in your hands, then straighten it with this iron tool that is seven or eight fingers long, and its width should match the size of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	And so it is necessary for the physician to have three or four of them ready, depending on what he needs in each case of fracture treatment.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure during your procedure, and it should be pointed at the front and thickest in the middle, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche," for which reason the curved head of the bone must be placed on the visible end of the bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And push it in once, until it returns, and let them lie evenly opposite each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is slight and tools cannot grasp the bone well, then you must cut off the head of the bone until tools can seize it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut with an appropriate tool, such as a scalpel or knife, to your ability;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	Then remove that which remains on the bone roughly and in small shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset but the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Once it is back in its place, then wet a cloth with black staunching wine and cleanse it properly if it is inflamed;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not apply any ointment or other substance containing oil to the wound, lest putrefaction and corruption arise therein.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	Then apply dressings once the bone has been reset, leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the surrounding skin according to the size of the wound, taking care that the wound is not constricted by the dressing.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	And many foolish physicians have done this and thereby brought death or corruption upon their patients.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And let the bandaging be softer and more gentle than other dressings.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that some misfortune will come of it, as we have said, and you find pain at its location, then do not put on bandages.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	But wrap it around instead, with hard cloths, and tie them securely.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days an opening of the wound, then remove what you had put on it previously, and apply healing salve to it, such as tetrapharmaceutical salve and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	You must wash the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is solid and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	The limb should be placed in such a way that the wound drains easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and the wound does not heal but continues to suppurate, know that there are small bone fragments present, for which reason you should cleanse the wound with tincture and remove all these unwanted fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula appears at the location, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in its chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the thighbone or shoulder blade, and other similar large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times death ensues, but let it be until it rots.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	Perhaps it will fall off by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if you cannot, then leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	about the burns that come on top of the scab
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times afterwards the health of the broken part is questioned, especially when it is near the joint, and it is unpleasant to see the deformity of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	And perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural tasks.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care then if the bone is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	If the administrator applies medicines that are astringent, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, thus you should take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with an astringent wine or with egg white or with egg yolk;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and apply it to the wound in bandages, pressing it down tightly, and do not remove it for many days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	then remove it, and start again with another one until the dislocation has been reduced;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you can press on a well-made splint;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of wood is such that it draws out all the swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the dislocation has already become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut on top of it, and remove the excess;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you can scrape it away with any sharp instrument until it is removed, and then treat it until it has healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	about the limb that is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When bone fracture is restored, but afterwards the limb remains weak and slender, this occurs for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	One reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	Or because there were too many bindings, and the limb could not receive nourishment;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	Or due to excessive bandaging;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	Or because of excessive movements, not at the right time.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	Or because it lacks blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their body supple until their blood becomes abundant within them;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and apply fomentations, give them joy and ease.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	Then place pitch on the limb so that the pitch attracts great nourishment to it, and apply warm water bandages often until the nourishment reaches the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The limb twisted after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone opens up, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	If you do not believe the foolish ones who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these deeds are blameworthy, causing great harm, and sometimes death
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	Nevertheless, if the dislocations and contusions are fresh, they should be rinsed with hot water, or softening herbs should be cooked on them, such as vinca leaves, roots, and mallow
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	And apply a softening poultice, such as well-made diacelion, and take the mollificating ointment of vinca, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply the poultice on
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Or you take fat figs, crush them with fennel seeds, and similar remedies that soften bone setting.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes dislocation occurs due to continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And move the limb each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the distortions are old and hardened like stone, it is necessary to remove them with an iron instrument; they should be cut down to the bone with a fine, light scalpel
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And apply bandages and care to the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations are when a joint leaves its place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, and the sufferer feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, they should try to reduce it immediately.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	If one delays, the area swells, and if it is barely reset.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	Therefore, one should not move it until the swelling has subsided:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Often brings about spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	However, when this happens, make the patient sweat, then leave him until the inflammation is reduced.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each joint as they come into their proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of the dislocations from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It happens sometimes that the jaws are dislocated outward, and the dislocation of both is in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	Either they are a little bony out of their place, or softened a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the chest, causing saliva to flow from the mouth so that he cannot hold it in nor close his mouth, and it envelops his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When dislocation is slight, it returns spontaneously in most cases.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in such a manner that the assistants hold the patient's head still, and the physician places his little finger of one hand at the root of the jaw dislocation within the mouth, if the dislocation is on the right side;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two fingers of the hands be spread apart to place it evenly;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the physician places it back until it returns to its proper place
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if resetting is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then apply warm water and oil, until they reset easily;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not delay in resetting them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient can close his mouth without difficulty, then apply warm, moist cloths made of oil, rose wax, and honey, and lightly bind it with soft linens.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their shoulders between two pillows so that they do not move to the right or left, nor try to mix things up, but instead take light food until the pain has subsided and the jawbones are healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then let them chew what they want lightly, and do not strain to open their mouth for eating and drinking, until the jawbone is completely healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if both jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their proper positions, then fever and chills may occur, sometimes with diarrhea and occasionally vomiting of clear bile
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see these signs, know that it is a loss.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times the person for whom this happens dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	of dislocation
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The dislocation cannot be dislocated from the inner side of the cheekbone nor from the breastbone; sometimes it is dislocated backward and can be felt quite well
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the treatment is that the patient should lie often on their back and extend their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press firmly with your hand's palm on it, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then place the bandage and tie it tightly
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the shoulder that is towards the back cannot dislocate
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	If not, and if it dislocates any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then place the splint and bandage, and secure it, commanding the patient to rest until they are healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And thus similarly is the head of the shoulder reset when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Chapter on the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder can be dislocated in only three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the socket below;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part towards the arm;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and sometimes it dislocates above, which happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and the shoulder does not dislocate behind or inside for the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	And often it dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, as it moves suddenly.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	In those who have enough flesh, it moves barely and returns barely.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there occurs a blow or fall which causes the shoulder to swell with a hot hematoma and the person believes that it is dislocated because of this
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	You must therefore test it until you are certain of it
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And dislocation is recognized when it is down towards the thighbone, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, which you will find clearly different.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder and below the thighbone you will touch the top of the shoulder as if it were an egg.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand to their neck nor move in any way
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	Also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly upon touching.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	This type of dislocation cannot be reduced except when it is new or if the child is the patient
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is for the practitioner to lift the patient's hand upwards, then place their fingers beneath the thighbone and forcefully raise the joint upwards into its proper place
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	The servant raises the hand, extends it upwards, then places it beneath
si venra hastanment.	so that it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days afterward, then the patient must be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and let the servant apply gently softening and soothing ointment, such as a decoction of celery, fennel, and melilot in water, and it should be applied;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then have the patient lie on their back, and place underneath the armpit a cloth of even thickness, not too soft nor too hard; then let the physician put their heel upon the cloth, lift the virtuous shoulder gently, and draw out the hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	And another servant should hold the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	When that shoulder returns perfectly aligned, then reset it according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and ensure that a man larger than the patient is present;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And let it be right across from the ribcage, and place your shoulder beneath the patient's elbow, then lift the elbow upwards so that the patient hangs down.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	Another minister pulls the patient's hand down towards their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, hang something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is reset in another manner as well:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And this one involves sticking a long, dry stick into the ground, onto which the head should be placed level with the fist, neither too thick nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then place it under the patient, but gently so they do not feel any pressure, and let them stand on the long stick.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then extend their arm downwards on the other side, and the dislocation will quickly return to its place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	But if it still does not want to return after all these things we have said, then perform this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a stick two arms long and four fingers wide, with a rounded end for easy insertion deep under the elbow.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then place upon the head of the patient a cloth moistened with water so that the wood does not burn the patient; then place it under the pillow of the patient.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	And stretch his arm along the wood's length, and tie the joint to the wood, and bind the arm at the hand's head; then place the arm on the edge of a wide beam, with the hand hanging down below, and let the body hang freely on the other side.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint is ready now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it has returned into its proper place, however this may have happened, then you must place a bandage of wool beneath the socket, sprinkle the whole shoulder and surrounding area with powdered mallow leaves mixed with incense and egg-white, then draw the bandage tight beneath the arm and tie the ends securely around the emplastrum; fasten the hand to its collarbone and let it remain in this position
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he consume little food, so that the limb may be rested; for it will heal more quickly.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	Then eat again after five or seven days, and move around.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is firm but not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, you must administer cauteries through three holes, as it is shown before in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and after seven days it still does not stay in place and the arm cannot be raised above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And know that the joint will never again be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation which is towards the hip, and breasts, or behind, if it occurs due to forceful movement of hands, and another ligature should be administered;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing there is stiffness in the limb and difficulty in movement, then let the patient exercise many times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original condition.
de la dislocation dou coute	of dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the shoulder joint is easily dislocated and can readily become dislocated again;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And if it has been dislocated from all sides, especially front and back, the dislocation is not hidden because it can be seen clearly and felt easily;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	And it becomes dislocated according to each position.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick limb with the sound one, you can then see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm nor touch the shoulder at all
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	Therefore you must reset it before an abscess forms there, for if an abscess had already formed, it would be difficult to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And sometimes it cannot be fully reset altogether, especially when it is behind;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	So it is worse than other dislocations and causes greater pain, and sometimes death occurs.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And restoration occurs when it is such that one can reset it, by extending his hand with both of yours.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And let his arms be extended, and the hands of the doctor according to the count be placed around, above and below, and push the joint towards his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is on the front, it can be reduced by doubling the hand onto itself and pressing the root of the palm against the dislocated neck.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong traction;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and two ministers should extend the arm, and two other ministers should hold it so that it does not move during the extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then twist the arm in both directions, then wrap a long and wide folded cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the doctor has joined the joint with his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint strongly until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, then put dry compresses with egg yolk on it, press it strongly, and wrap the arm around the patient's neck, leaving it for a few days before removing it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen it, and let it be.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint is not properly aligned, then recommence the emplacement and loosen the ligature, and leave it thus for several days until it is firmly in place.
puis le deslie.	Then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if there is great heat after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe it and rub it gently, and press until it is soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or you put a greasy wool cloth on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let it enter into the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the wool cloth back on, and then enter the bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And thus do it two or three times until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see [that the joint is still not healed], then put on a hot moist cloth made with butter, and bind it tightly.
si revenra a sa disposition.	If it returns to its state
li dislocation de la main	Dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The dislocated joint of the hand returns, and the return is easier than with other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it must be reset quickly to its place, in the very same opening that it was dislocated, before the place becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the resetting is done by placing the dislocated hand on a table, extending the hand of the assistant, and the physician pressing down evenly until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, you must ensure that it is properly in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then the patient places the back of their hand on a table at full extension and reset.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient places the back of their hand on the table, and the physician places his hand upon that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then apply soothing emplasters to alleviate heat and swelling, and leave it thus without restarting the procedure.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you are unable to place it in its proper position even after several days, then the joint remains dislocated.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	And let no harm come to the patient from this cautery until the hand is weakened, and it can grasp nothing.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Then know that the nerve is cut or the artery.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If there is no other means to burn by fire near the case, then perhaps nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	"And when the hand is in its place, put on the dressing that we have said, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and let it remain thus."
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then make him warm water compresses, and rub him until he is free."
de la dislocation des dois de la main	"on the dislocation of the fingers of the hand"
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes both sides of the hand are dislocated, sometimes at the back of the palm or the front.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then straighten the hand and push the dislocation into your pouch until it returns, then hold the head of the hand and bend it towards the side where it was dislocated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	And leave it for two days, then put it even on that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and bind it tightly as we have said, both during the day and night, and when moving it, and re-bind it tightly.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this frequently until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the front of the hand, doing as you have done here until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And likewise does he, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	"on the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back"
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the sciatica of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are many dislocations, there is no treatment, for the patient hastens his death.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the sign is that evacuations happen involuntarily, and he cannot control them. Often some limb becomes limp, either both thighs or both arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the backbone moves in four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	That which moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment for this is that you should examine whether the gilbositez came from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no cure or healing of it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falls, blows, or similar things; the old masters describe various ways of treating it with grand words, but there is no great benefit in all of them.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abbreviated it according to my intention and made tools in various forms.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gilbositez which comes at the front of the chest, there is no healing.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And also that which comes directly into both sides; and one can only cure those properly that come to the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	And it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back evenly on a level surface, with restraint underneath them so they do not become bruised.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then plant one stake firmly at the head of the bed and another at the feet, and tie a rope around the patient's thighs, another at the hips, knees, and ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	And two assistants hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and let them be securely tied, with the stake firmly planted as we have said, and the physician place their palms firmly on the spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three fingers wide and place it under the shoulder blade while the patient is lying on their side, then insert the end of the board under the shoulder blade and place the middle of the board on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and the physician places their feet on the other end of the board and presses firmly until it returns to its proper place
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see one, do it to the joint that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you shall place two splints at the head of the patient's injured arm, and two others towards the feet; let there be a space of one palm length between each splint above and below.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	And let each splint have one hole where the joint is located, so that they are securely placed on the ground without moving.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	And between each pair of splints there should be one turning splint on which the joint turns, and this turning splint should have two small splints, each a palm length long, to turn the joint.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the bandage that is among the splints around the joint towards the head, and the other bandage around the feet at the other joint; each assistant should turn their respective joint throughout the binding process, and the master shall keep the bandage even as we have described.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is aligned, then place a drying plaster with plenty of egg, and then the bandages, and then the hot iron of a tablet of three fingers in length, which should press on the location of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a linen, as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until they are healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if anything happens at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines along with the hot iron that we mentioned earlier;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	And sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower spine of the back, and it is believed to be dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	And it is the bone that appears, therefore one must not presume anything about it:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	For fear of bringing death upon oneself.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only dislocation occurs, not like other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	And the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	Within and without, and before and behind.
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	And further within others, and mostly dislocated before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the sign of its dislocation within is that when the sick leg is joined with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the sick knee opens wider than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee by the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the place near it is swollen with a hot boil because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one that comes on the outside is that it is opposite to those that have come before
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the sign of that which occurs in front is that they stretch their leg well according to its length;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	Nevertheless, they cannot bend the knee without pain; and if one tries to make them walk, they cannot go forward, and they retain their urine, and the anus swells, and when they walk, they limp on their heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of one that happens behind is that he cannot straighten or bend his knee, and his leg is twisted compared to the other one, and the angle is softened, and the hip joint is located beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The treatment for this type of dislocation is that if the dislocation is ancient, and it remains in its position, there is no remedy;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And presumption must not be there.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the case where dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocation, you should hasten to put the joint back in place, extend it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	Perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, you must then seize a strong assistant, and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or have one person tie it above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another assistant extends their hand in such a way that they place their hands under the buttocks, then grasp it with a soft bandage on the hip.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And another ties the head of the bandage;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they both pull up and down at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of stretching applies to all four types of hip dislocation, and if the dislocation has returned to its proper position as we have said, then that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this does not happen, then treat it in the same way.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When dislocation is on the right side, you must place the patient on their sound cheek, then put a sling on the root of the thigh, and the spot that is below the angle, then stretch the sling upwards towards the angle, and towards the front.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then take other assistants by his arms, embrace the great length of the dislocated thigh, and extend it strongly forward:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	And it will now return to its proper place;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	This method is easier than others for reduction.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot secure it in this way that we have described, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a soft strong rope on both heels and both knees, and let the dislocated leg extend about two fingers more than the other
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then hang it over the top of a stick, and let it hang freely from the ground for two arm-lengths
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command one minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, embracing the thigh strongly for the joint will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when dislocation occurs at the hip joint, let the patient lie down in the manner we described for those with gibbousness; then apply traction to the limb above the injured leg properly, and also above the foot.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two reeds: one at the head, another at the feet; then insert one reed between the thighs of the patient in this manner;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And place moistened cloths around to prevent burning of the patient; then extend each assistant towards him, and the surgeon shall set his hand equally upon the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place a board on top and press down as we have described in the case of gibosity; let the patient lie on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when dislocation is anterior, the injured leg must be extended hastily, as I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	Then let the surgeon place his foot on the outer side of the injured leg and press with the other hand, then extend it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if dislocation is at the hip joint, it is not necessary to extend the patient downwards or lift him up; rather, he should remain as if the hip were dislocated backwards, as we have described for childbirth on both hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And it should be placed on its face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one should press upon the joint against the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	And it will be set when the patient extends their legs, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then join the thighs together, place the splint, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And let him rest for three or four days, then remove it, and place the splint on top;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	If you see that they are even, then bind it again as before, and leave it for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then remove it, and let the patient go gently until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	"Of dislocation of the knee"
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	That is to say, inward, outward, and backward;
et ne desalue point devant.	And it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you tell the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not bend easily, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all these is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if possible, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then grasp his knee with your palms, draw it between your thighs, then bend both sides of the knee forcefully;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And another assistant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place; and the sign that it is correctly reset is that he can move his leg easily against his thigh.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	Then apply the plaster and bind the leg to the thigh tightly with bandages for three or four days, then release.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And do not let the patient walk until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb isn't straight, then extend it firmly as we have said in the treatment of the thigh until it is aligned
de la dislocation dou talon	"Of dislocation of the heel"
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	"The heel can sometimes be dislocated and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen and sticks out on the side where it was dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The reset will be easy, and one should easily extend the arm at its hands when it is only shaken.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated entirely, then you must make the patient sit up straight, and tie one leg of the attendants firmly above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left twice, then lift it up and gently place the foot back in its original position.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	Do this twice, as we have said, pulling and pushing the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns to its proper place, that is good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	But if not, start again, for it will dislocate again.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot be returned in this way, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly plant a pole in the earth between their thighs, tying cloths around so that the patient is not injured.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then have the attendants hold the thigh, and another attendant stretch out the foot at the patient's hands or feet so that it is held in place.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each attendant stretches out equally, and the pole should always be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient steady when lifting them.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then let the physician set the dislocation evenly with his hands, and another assistant grasp the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, apply the plaster and dressings, press firmly, and bind the foot to the leg; beware the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so the bandage is not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then let it rest for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, then press harder;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then untie on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if they walk before this time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if inflammation occurs afterwards, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed."
des dois	"of the fingers"
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	"When the fingers are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, and this is an easy matter."
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the joints at the back of the foot, then make the patient sit on a flat surface or on two boards laid straight, and place your foot over what opens from these joints; then press firmly with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	And when it is aligned, and there appears nothing, then place under the sole of the foot a board at two inches, then press firmly, and leave for three days, then release.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	"of wound and dislocation together"
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, often the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	Do not be overly confident in treating it if you are not skilled in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, nor should you be hasty rather than merciful.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	Use cooling remedies at the beginning to calm heat, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope, reset the limb now before the hot abscess arrives.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	When the limb is in place, apply cooling remedies for the hot abscess, and dress the wound with drying ointments as necessary.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with the dislocation there is fracture, and small bones dislocated, then set them, and do as we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And keep yourself from the path of fear, as I have said, for you will move according to your Creator, and for the sake of your knowledge and body.
