O brothers, please complete this free book, which is the last of science in medicine, for its completion and to be completed with it; and by its explanations, declarations, and promises, I ask you to read through that tract, as surgery may be done
The operation is considered to be closed within our region and time of all private things, except that it is very cold in science; and the sight of it remains with us. And do not mention anything but a few descriptions in the ancient writings, which will make those errors disappear and their truth become apparent through these reasons for its duration and use
I ask you to make the interpretation of that tract in its second way by exposition and declaration and summary; and so on the forms of cautery tools and other instruments for the work may be added with a statement, and for preparation, which is necessary.
The cause for which it is difficult to find a good artist in our times is that the art of medicine has become long and that because its practitioners know so little about anatomy compared to what they are taught; and have also been studied on the bones, nerves, and vessels, their number, and the excisions or separations between them.
This first sentence seems to be a medical instruction regarding how to administer a specific remedy or treatment for someone with gout. Here's my best guess at the translation: "By means of this procedure known as Ypocras, which in essence is gentle but also in the art of medicine.
This sentence seems to be a continuation of the previous one and provides further details about using Ypocras for treatment. Here's my best translation: "Firstly, we must enter into this free space; who does not know anatomy is excluded from being treated, lest they fall into error with which men will die, as has often been seen by those of whom science in this matter and its experiments are made.
This sentence seems to be a warning or caution about using Ypocras improperly in the context of medical treatment for gout. Here's my best translation: "A doctor, when he has inserted an esophilium into the vagina of a woman and finds some arteries within it that are flowing with great force towards her death between many.
This sentence seems to be the continuation of previous instructions regarding using Ypocras for treatment and its consequences if used improperly or excessively. Here's my best translation: "Another doctor ordered a poultice from a man who had been in his condition, but it was great, and applied it on him, and covered it with some of the bladder, so that this man on the third day died.
This sentence seems to be further instruction regarding using Ypocras excessively and the consequence of doing so. Here's my best translation: "You have already called for fear, and you saw that because of the greatness of the poultice and the disposition of the patient who would die.
When another doctor was consulted by the patient's brother-in-law from our land for surgery and he also consulted with black knight who had already fractured his arm in that area; and after having examined the fracture the doctor blamed ignorance of the patient, caused the fracture to remain open, over the wounds on the chest, back, belly and abdomen, without healing it.
According to their desires, I will follow your commands, and every day I'll visit them both until the fracture heals completely and they are cured of pain.
He appealed to you, I will follow your commands, and by following the treatment given to me I was able to achieve tranquility and eliminate their pain completely.
Although the corruption had been confirmed in that member and could not be prevented from continuing with it, they still tried to remove the corruption from the member until the patient was cured.
When another doctor examined him and found an ulcer that had been there for many days, he blamed the malice of the patient's lord on this illness
The cause for the gout is the melancholic humors, and although it hurts all parts of their body except one that suffered from everything becoming inflamed.
For this, ladies and gentlemen, it is necessary for you to perform the operation in two stages: one where healing is expected, and another where there are risks of major consequences
You must now enter the location of that free space where the operation occurs which has errors and fear, so that you should preserve it and save that one, in order for people not to stumble upon the way they speak and you are distressed.
Then please take your weapons of solicitation, protection from God, and your sins that have been spoken and committed.
Then proceed by the grace of God to heal and achieve success, take on terrible sins that are difficult to cure, hold your weapons here so you do not tremble; in faith and in His name may it never fail: for how much remains to your glory?
And please excuse any of your shortcomings. "I will not bring evil to my patients.
It is necessary that you enter this free space in three parts.
Begin the division of the free area by the first part of the first stage. The first stage is organized in terms of instruments and procedures to be carried out by the doctors for this operation.
The second division The second chapter of surgery and incision, extraction, and excision; it is ordered to show the forms of instruments used in this field
The third chapter of restoration and dislocation, and treatment for the sick or injured; it is ordered from top to bottom, and shows the forms of instruments used in this field
Consider the quality of youth and old age in cautery; and what complications may arise as a result.
The youth of cautery and age are long and complex, subtle to understand, and secret; many secrets there are, and disagreements arise, so that the sermon on them is long.
Cautery interferes with all universally relevant material, except two complications: adhesions and scars of the body.
In the adhesion and scar complication of cautery, healing occurs; it is convenient for cauterized wounds that are dry to be cured, as dryness is characteristic of fire, and inconvenientness arises when dry wounds occur with wet cauterization.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
However, you should also note that practicing caution and exercise in the practice of cautery is important to avoid accidents, injuries from these practices, as well as the time limit for each.
It is advisable to consult with doctors about these complications as well, and avoid practicing cautery in haste, especially when dealing with wet or moist conditions that all doctors agree are best avoided.
Lastly, it is important to note that the secret of cure for cautery burns and its effects on the body are known best in cautery as medicine compared to simple cauteries where only the part which has been cauterized feels pain and not the other member at the same time but instead a short while later.
Medicine practiced on the affected member will cause pain in another part of the body that is difficult to heal and be very painful.
In the presence of a great amount of warmth and goodness in its nature, it does not do anything other than to harm
You should be aware that the sentences have become disordered due to the passage of time and are no longer grammatically correct.
You are suggesting that cauterization is convenient in all situations, except when time runs out or when the need for treatment becomes urgent, and especially if it's for necessary pain like those caused by injury, burns, or other types of pain that can't be treated with delay as fear of causing harm may outweigh the potential benefits.
This means that in your cases or if medical professionals believe otherwise, when treating a condition that can only be cured with cauterization it is not convenient all the time and should be done during times of urgency to avoid any potential consequences.
The cause is that the treatment for this ailment occurs instead of medicine which changes the complexion and dries up the fluids causing the pain.
The first sentence of the text translates to "I am about to explain the importance of using a pointed cautery for relieving pain in gout".
The second sentence translates to "It is also possible that the gout will return at some point in time, after completing the treatment and placement of the device, as well as its completion within one's body, and due to the causes mentioned above; unless the ailment is treated with a pointed cautery, which could alleviate or prevent pain from occurring again. In other words, if precautions are not taken.
The final sentence translates to "Therefore, the most common remedy is pointed cautery, and it is straightforward; unless one understands in what way these are applied by the physician, who thinks that they do not cure or prevent pain.
The cause of this is contrary to the above; and the reason that pointed cautery is the most common remedy for medicine is only when administering the methods of healing in certain ailments, those medicines don't confer it, and at the end of the cause, a physician administers a pointed cautery and applies it. The conclusion of the text translates to "The pains here refer to the common use of pointed cautery in medicine that is different from what doctors used earlier.
When the first course of cautery is done more than necessary, it should not be done by itself but for the equality and sublimity of its substance.
When cautery is done on the body but not on the eyes, it should be made in every other part of the body except for the eyes; and cautery to that area is better and more effective than doing so with fire alone, as there will be fewer burns; also if you adjust the intensity setting when cauterizing over the eye, then the heat may cause the cautery implement to stick to it.
In order for cautery to be done properly and completely, you must gently and carefully regulate the operation procedure.
You have already ordered this chapter on cautery after the previous chapters, and you have arranged it in the order that the patient wants it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization covers all the accidents caused by coldness and dampness, from head to toe of the limbs including ears and eyelids, causing excessive sleep disturbances, toothaches and jaw pain, as well as universal body pain generally caused by coldness or dampness with paralysis and apoplexy like in those ailments.
"The form of this cauterization is as follows: First command the patient to empty their bowels with a laxative, either three or four times, then examine the rectum and age of them, and their usual habit.
"Then command him to raise his head with a sharp pain and place something soft between your thighs in order to prevent the stool from coming out.
"Then gently remove the bandage on her hand, place a soft towel over her nose between her lips. "But if the location mentioned above has been found, signal that location and proceed with the olive oil cautery which is as follows:
"Then gently remove that over the location you mentioned, and move it slightly towards where your hand is, at which point your hand will be tight gradually, and then rotate that.
"Then gently lift your hand and look at the location, if you see any amount of the head uncovered, then count how many grains of sand there are, the doctors will raise their hands, and if not return your hand to that place, otherwise do that.
"Then take a little salt and dissolve it over the location and let it stay there for three days.
And then place a cushion beneath their buttocks, and put one over the opening of their body to prevent injury from the firelight. Then apply cold water to the affected area to help cool it down
It is customary that when a man gains weight, he will get fat arms, so as not to be ashamed and look young.
And it is customary that if the cautery is done to the nose, no more bleeding will occur from any other part of the body.
Then return to where you came from and start again.
And it is customary that the cautery should be done on the right side of the body first. Then put your hand over the opening to prevent the nose from falling out, and this is how the little animals do It is customary for them to get rid of the cold humors in their head.
And then hold onto the excess fat for a long time, and apply it when it's solid.
It is customary that when they ask about cauteries of all kinds, and you are afraid to answer them directly; but rather, tell them the reason for it in a roundabout way, and if necessary make excuses for your silence by saying, "As I was explaining to my previous questioners...
When joint pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
The head cautery.
When chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the head of a patient who has been previously cauterized with a certain type of cautery due to those causes, doctors consider whether the nature of the patient's head is very dry or extremely moist (or "grast"), believing that this could be related to the dryness of the head. And if the cautery above the patient's forehead is removed, then the pain will cease. Remove the bandage and discover how much of it was removed and cauterize that part with a cautery as if it were called "the space" (i.e., the location where pain has been experienced). And wash your hands so that you do not see the wound where the patient has suffered extreme pain from other cauteries on their head.
You will apply this cautery to that location, which is a subtle type of cautery used when the other cauteries on the head have been removed, and it is how they are applied in practice.
The patient is being prepared for an operation that involves making incisions in the thighs, placing cushions under them, serving on their legs, chest, holding their hands, to prevent the intestine from coming out when there's pain in the feet.
The cautery must not be too hot or cold.
When the pain in a part of the head is so severe that it cannot be relieved by other means and must be treated with a hot cautery, or when the pain occurs within an ulcer, the cautery should be used to treat it; otherwise, use another cure for pains only if necessary.
If the cautery is used to treat a severe headache and the ulcers are treated at the same time with other remedies for pain in the extremities of the patient's body. Place a bandage over the area where the pain is in the temple to prevent it from coming out through the forehead, or place a covering so that you do not see it.
And then apply a tight bandage for one hour to prevent swelling of the chest area and place it under three hours; and apply lotion on both or three days, and rest over the chest area so that the location does not come out by force.
And then cure him with a remedy when he is healthy.
If you use remedies that are in the same book of medicines used above.
The second cautery procedure should be performed in this way:
It is recommended that the head of the cautery should be in a form similar to an anvil so as to prevent any bending or twist when applied to the patient's body part.
Then place your hand over that area of pain, keeping it steady so as not to cause injury and gradually reduce its size at a slow pace.
If the amount of blood flowing through that vein is such that it might be causing pain during palpation, then place your hand gently to prevent injury and take extra caution to ensure there's no bleeding from any veins or arteries nearby.
Then apply a poultice of salt and water to the affected area, covering it with cloth for three days; also, apply ointment on the wound, ensuring cleanliness.
If any arterial incision is made during the cautery procedure on the arm, it should be carefully inspected to ensure that it was not an antique one.
The fourth cap.
The cautery for the antique artery.
When you perform cautery on the artery mentioned earlier in previous care or in divisions of wounds and miss out on taking it, causing pain to the area around that location as well; pause your hand gently and hold tightly to prevent any injury during incision while also covering its mouth with a gauze pad.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which may make swallowing difficult, and that no nerve should be injured, nor any spasms occur.
If you are to be cautious and careful in the flow of blood from an artery that is blocked, for fear of a blockage occurring elsewhere as well, let us proceed with caution and care at the outset.
And remember to apply a poultice of warm damp cloth on the affected area for 20 minutes every hour as needed.
If you find that the patient's discomfort is intolerable due to this caution and excessive care of their body parts, burn it with a pointed cautery in the affected area as described previously, and treat the wound as soon as possible to ensure it heals well.
If you find that the cautery we described earlier in the chapter on arterial cauteries is not sufficient or more intense, this is the preferred method and may be superior.
Capitulation.
Cauterization of joints pain.
When the joint pains occur due to cold humors and are treated as described above in section B of this chapter with the exception that we do not burn away the pain but rather cauterize it. The point of this procedure is called a puncture and is used for:
The first sentence translates to "now open and make ready the opening", suggesting that a patient is being prepared for an operation of some sort in their groin area, where pain has been experienced by the patient. "Then take the cautery from your hand and place it gently on the small of her back, holding tight to prevent slipping.
"If you find a wound in the area where the cautery was applied, and if that place is contaminated or infected, then apply another cautery.
"May it be well done
"The cauterization of the wound.
"The treatment is only necessary for those cases where pain occurs from a specific reason as we mentioned earlier in the sections of diseases.
The cauterization of that particular area is done when there's dryness or spasm of a nerve, because it was mentioned earlier in the section on diseases.
When you treat that particular area of the wound make sure to also cleanse and disinfect your hands before starting treatment. Also keep in mind while treating, if necessary to cauterize another place near it as well, one will cauterize the area between two thighs (pubic area), a second one on the breastbone, or all three depending on what is needed.
"Place your hand carefully away from the patient's body to avoid any harm.
"The method of cauterization is to burn a small part of the tip of the ear, and also in another place on the temple; from which length it is second after the length of the thumb, and pause your hand from burning until enough of its surface has been burned off.
"This is the way to perform a cautery, specifically for surgeons, and it is called 'mesa' in Spanish. "However, please remember that a small amount of excess fat should be removed beforehand.
"Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and proceed as if nothing has happened.
I apologize for any inconvenience, but my knowledge of this specific medieval text is incomplete. Could you please provide more context or additional information about what this text refers to?
"The method of cauterization used in ancient apoplexy.
"When ancient apoplexy is cured and the patient does not have fever, the doctors cauterize that part with four cauteries: on all the ears of his head; and also on the ear lobe; and also in the corner. "The method of cautery is to be done second after that part has been mentioned.
"Now the stomach has been cauterized, and there is another method to be applied; proceed as if nothing happened.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
Cautery to relieve pain.
Insert the patient between two sheets of linen and apply hot towels, first covering their head with a large one, then gradually reducing the size as they are cooled down.
Place the patient's head on a flat surface, and put their hands under their chest to prevent it from moving around too much as described in the chapter on plastering.
Remove those covered with gauze that are being used for cautery. Do what I've already said.
Do what is necessary for those who are sick; and if not, apply three hot cauteries at the bottom of their head starting from the top down to the back of the neck. Place between each cautery a towel soaked in vinegar and water as described earlier.
Do what is necessary to improve tolerance and prevent further attacks: apply the cautery at the site of the attack if slight; but if greater addition occurs, apply it over two areas on each leg.
Apply this between those who are sick and those that have had attacks: olive oil instead of water in the cautery as described earlier.
"A physician's duty arises when joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, especially in the feet.
"The cautery application across all over the body and its cooling effect.
"After making the points on the top of the head and above where you mentioned; and then go to the top of the patient's buttocks, apply the cautery there as well, over all the ears, under each ear, below the forehead, beneath each cheek, and lastly, over both shoulders.
"If necessary in the patient's illness of cooling the body and especially if there are multiple ailments and the illness is severe, then the doctor cautorizes that over both shoulders as well. "Then they take a warm compress to cover it up with.
"A physician's duty arises when joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and especially in the feet.
"The application of cautery to the whole body, including its cooling effect.
"They do not cautorize the intestinal area, but rather the thigh muscles.
"After making the points on the top of the head and above where you mentioned; then go to the top of the patient's buttocks, apply the cautery there as well.
When a person does not feel the medications alleviating their joint pain, then doctors prescribe an enema and massage the patient's back to facilitate digestion of food, in order that it may bring good fortune
Then place a pointed cautery on the top of their head and another one beneath the previous hand, and another one on the forehead above, and over each of their ears as well. If the patient is strong and tolerant, then doctors apply pointed cauteries to those that we have mentioned before, preventing paralysis and causing relaxation of the spine and legs.
Then place another pointed cautery above the previous one.
If a person is young, doctors will pause after this one and apply another mild pointed cautery.
Chapter eleven.
Treatment of melancholia.
When the causes for melancholia are corrupted and flabby, doctors apply pointed cauteries to those that we mentioned before in order to prevent paralysis.
If the cause of melancholia is declining to melancholia and the patient's body is wet, then doctors prescribe a treatment that moistens the skull beneath what we have mentioned before in order to prevent it from worsening or spreading.
When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion on top of them and another servant to hold their head at an angle slightly forward, and another person to support his head from behind gently.
The patient is lying down, so that all treatment can be performed on the whole body.
Apply a hot compress to both thighs and legs. Place that over the face to warm it up quickly by touching it gently. Hold the cushion at an angle in front of their head and gently squeeze it so that it is warm.
Give the patient this medication for a week in addition to their regular treatment, or if you wish, burn it at specific points second time as directed; otherwise keep using your hand as recommended: this is special cautery which moistens the skin equally.
Place that on their body or in front of their head gently.
Chapter 12
The water cautery will decrease the pain.
When you start giving the water to drink by the mouth from which portion it was given and told him to hold his head with that water, and keep applying wet dressings on all the wounds.
On each day
Firstly, make a small cut at the top of the head with a cautery; secondly, burn a second cautery on both temples if it is the onset of gout in two hands, or one if it is an onset of gout in one hand.
Burn the veins and arteries that are leading to the fingertips, leaving only a small opening in each temple area.
After cautery is done, guard the sores from further bleeding and if you see any more open sores, then apply some medicine that could be available to you.
You will remove the cautery and incisions made of these and caution against further bleeding sores.
Some veins were cauterized between two bones, causing it to produce further pain in the future.
This is the thirteenth chapter of the text.
Cautery on old tears.
When old tears are very old and have infiltrated the veins and arteries in the forehead area, it is found that this type of gout occurs frequently, so doctors burn a cautery on one of those areas to stop further inflammation. When it comes to adding a dressing, then burn that dressing on all sides of the part of the body located in the small intestine with a very sharp cautery.
This sentence appears to be incomplete or incorrect as "Capitol" is not a recognized word and there are no accompanying punctuation marks to provide context for the missing information. Could you please rephrase this, or give me more details?
Cautery on nose discharge
When you treat that in the division and do not choose to stop your treatment, the doctor will apply a poultice on it, wet with three cloths, and have him drink three times of wine; put a bandage over its head, and burn the middle part and the outer part with a cautery. Burn that on the lower half of both calves over the two corresponding areas, bind them together with little bandages.
Keep away from the fire that you do not ignite it.
And this burning of the calf is the custom
This sentence appears to be incomplete or incorrect as "Capitol" is not a recognized word and there are no accompanying punctuation marks to provide context for the missing information. Could you please rephrase this, or give me more details?
Cautery on nose discharge
When the eyelid of the eye is mollified due to mistreatment or from humidity, then burn that eyelid with a cautery similar to this one. This is how it's done.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. The length of each cautery shall be proportional to the size of the cushion.
Do not apply too much pressure with your hand over the cautery, as you will need to adjust the size of the cushion accordingly.
Chapter 16.
Cautery on the eyelid when the hairs become inflamed and pus comes out.
If the hairs of the eyelid are inflamed and pus comes out, then you should apply cautery to those parts as well, choosing between two methods: either cautery or medical treatment.
If cautery is done on the forehead, command the patient to keep their hair trimmed as well, extending and applying ointment; or if you must remove it, then apply oil onto their scalp in order to prevent itching of the hairs being cut off.
And when cuts and sutures are made, pause the healing of the patient's head in the meantime, and apply oil over the hairs on their forehead to start with, as you should aim for the length of a leaf blade, while also starting from the beginning that way.
On each breast there shall be placed a cushion for support, so that they may rest their hands on them in comfort,
And the pointed cautery which this is its form
And the pointed cautery shall be applied to the figure gradually, until it burns through and destroys the surface of that part, appearing as if by magic.
The remedy of the eye will be that you shall wipe away the blood from it, and put a poultice on it to draw out the poison.
Then elevate your bed and place something soft under him for three days, until it is healed. And then cure that with an ointment which will heal it.
If there is no cause for it, then do not apply the pointed cautery over that part as you did before.
If the eyes are inflamed in that way, then cure it by elevating them to their normal place and holding tight so they do not touch each other.
The pointed cautery by the burning medicine is to command the patient to lie on it for as long as possible and hold tightly so they do not move. And afterwards apply a piece of cloth in that manner.
"Bring the patient to a comfortable position and remove all obstacles from their way.
"Prepare the patient and hold them still while administering a small dose of medicine that will numb their mouth so they cannot feel its effect.
"When the numbing effect wears off, give them water to wash away the taste of the medicine and consider whether their eyes are still closed as they were at the time it was applied or not, if so continue with your operation and administer another dose.
"After removing the adhesive strip that causes the pain and curing any wounds or injuries, proceed to the next step.
"You must be vigilant to ensure that the medicine does not go away from their eyes, if it was previously closed and has been made open in any way, continue with your operation.
This is how the ointment should be applied
The palms of men vary in size and shape, so when it's time to apply the ointment, you should make sure your grip is comfortable.
Do not confuse the way to approach with the one used in this field of study.
The seventeenth chapter.
Cautery on a tear in the eyelid.
When curing a fistula in that area where we mentioned the sections of illnesses and do not confuse your cure, you must cauterize it with this manner: tell the patient to place their head down towards the thighs, and have his/her head between them so firmly that no hair is pulled or moved from its position.
Then, in case of hemorrhoid, apply a poultice on the hemorrhoidal area either in the form of a poultice made from crushed leaves or in the form of poultice made from crushed millet over the affected part.
And do this with the cautery as follows:
The one that is used here should be either a curved one or a simple straight one; use it on the part of the body where you are applying the cautery.
If so, apply it to another part. And if you want to try that way as well.
"May it please you who has most of its work.
And place the fistulas if they are opened, and remove from it the saliva and excrement that were there If not opened, then leave it alone and extract its blood content.
If the cautery is burning, then take care to cover your mouth with a little cloth to prevent burns from occurring in it, and place the cautery on top of the nose, so that no harm comes to your face or to the patient's nostrils, and pause the cautery at the edge of the flame and extinguish it.
Then if the first cautery enters through the nose without issue, it's okay; but otherwise, repeat one or two more times depending on how much is needed; and leave it for three days, placing a pad over its mouth to prevent dryness as it heals.
May if after 10 days and it is not healed, then pause over the strong corrosive medicine to be placed in its cavity so that the nose is uncovered and removed from its source.
Another method for cautery of the fistulas was: insert into the location of the fistulas and then place it and pause in that small opening which is its form; and put over there a quantity of about one drop of lead, and keep your hand covered up to prevent it from coming out on you.
When the fistula has been cured by cautery and care, yes it is; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a poultice of salt and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity when it comes out in its proper location.
The eighteenth chapter of the work begins with an apology for any inconvenience caused by the unusual terminology used throughout the text, as well as an explanation that the chapter will be devoted entirely to a discussion on the art and practice of surgery.
The cautery shall operate on the affected parts
The veins and arteries will often burst in the thighs, but also frequently in those of infants.
If you do not care for the wounds as instructed in the divisions and miss this opportunity to apply the cautery, then I suggest using a smaller one with these instructions.
And if it is necessary to make incisions into the body cavity, do so with great care and small tools.
Be cautious when applying the cautery closely between the wounds to prevent any injury from the cauterized parts.
And carefully apply it, being careful not to burn yourself with it.
The nineteenth chapter of this work discusses the art and practice of surgery in detail, explaining various procedures that may be performed by a surgeon.
The cautery shall operate on the fistula in the mouth.
When it is necessary to cauterize the fistula in the uvula or palate, apply gently with your hand and remove when done as well as burn yourself during application of this cautery. If you do not properly cure that fistula or miss this opportunity for treatment by a doctor, then I suggest using another type of cautery based on its size received from the fistula; also place it at the very top of the fistula, so that any fire from it will not harm either the front or back of him. Do apply that cautery as instructed in the passage regarding curing.
When the disease is suspected to be absent or cured, it's good; otherwise, a doctor should seek out and examine his patients in order for them to be treated promptly.
To prevent the intestine from coming out
Cautery of the teeth and mollification of the arteries.
When the arteries are mollified by humidity and the teeth are inflamed but do not heal when medicines are used, then pause at the head of the patient in that manner so as to prevent it from coming out suddenly; and you should insert a small entry into which the heat of fire is brought upon the edge of the tooth, causing it to be inflamed.
Then lift your hand with both fingers and place them next to each other for the cautery.
And place the patient's mouth under a cold shower for an hour and half to cool down the toothache; if it remains painful after that, then the inflamed gum is strengthened and the moisture is corrupted.
To prevent gout.
Cautery of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by frostbite or cold that has entered the tooth root and cannot be cured with medicine, then a doctor should perform cautery in two ways; either cautery of the veins or cautery of fire.
When the cautery is applied to the body of the patient and blisters occur at that time, place it on the tip of the finger and let it merge into the body part, and when it is placed over a painful tooth keep it in position until the pain disappears.
And place the instrument between teeth where the wisdom of the fire arrives at the root of the tooth.
If you see a blister or lesion on the body of someone else's tooth, place it between their teeth and keep it in position until the fire goes out because of the presence of pain from that cavity on the tooth.
The cautery on the face is that you attend to any burn or pain, and it should not penetrate into the mouth of the patient because of their sensitivity to fire.
Place the cautery in its correct form and let it stay over the tooth, and do this on both days until the pain is relieved or on another day.
And cover the mouth of the patient with a soft cloth and let it stay there for one hour, this is the correct form of the cautery.
Cauterize at whatever point you think to be most effective.
This is how a syringe works
This is the second chapter of the book "The Capitularies.
Cautery for external hemorrhoids.
When external hemorrhoids are inflamed and cause pain but not treated promptly, doctors prescribe cautery in the form of a hemostat to apply it to one extremity; if necessary, pause that over another extremity; then light on the first finger until the other hand is free from smoke
If the finger is small, doctors prescribe the cautery for three days and then stop on the third day unless the pain persists after this treatment.
And if necessary cure that with hot compresses every so often until he is healed.
This is the third chapter of the book "The Capitularies.
Cautery for hemorrhoids, both internal and external.
When the humidity is applied to the anal canal of the lung and especially when this is inflamed with a severe complication, doctors advise that the patient evacuate stool at first by laxatives; afterwards, cautery should be performed in the area just mentioned.
"Keep in mind that you should not touch the pointed instrument to the groin or push it towards the head of the patient, but only move it gently.
"Burn that second cautery near the joint of the thigh on the right side of the body. "The cautery should be placed in a manner similar to what was done previously.
"Incorrect the second sentence as it is incorrect and needs correction.
"Chapter XXIV
"The treatment of pneumonia and coughing.
When pneumonia and lung inflammation occur due to cold humors, doctors apply two cauteries: one on the neck between the ribs and below it, another on the chest area between two breasts; both cauteries should be placed in a manner similar to what was done previously.
If you want, the application of the cautery can be made in a manner similar to how it was applied for joint pain treatment.
The points should be placed near those, and the second cautery as shown previously that is considered to be healthy.
"The cauteries should have three steps when performing a treatment like this, first apply the first cautery as shown previously.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Cautery should be applied to the top of the patient's hand.
The patient's hand should be repositioned gently and securely back into place as soon as possible to avoid dislocation, unless the dislocation occurs during the return of their arm or leg. In that case, have them reverse onto their affected side (arm or leg) and elevate their elbow or knee so they can rest on it.
Apply the cautery to two fingers at a time, in this manner:
Cautery should be applied to the fingertips of both hands one at a time, in this manner:
The cushions should be adjusted after this manner and for the reason that they are the eighth.
Then pause on applying the cautery and have them remain still to avoid excessive heat or pain in their limbs as long as they are comfortable.
When a dislocation is caused by cold humors in the extremities and it's confirmed that the moisture has been increased and the patient is improving
Chapter 26
Cautery on the stomach
Cauterize on the stomach when pain occurs inside it and excessive moisture increases the swelling of the abdomen, continue with care and do not confirm, put a cushion beneath his shoulders and extend them, also place cushions under both arms as well for support; additionally, cautorize three points: one on the chest corresponding to the amount of a finger-tip cautery on each arm, two on the two ribs corresponding to the cautery points.
If the depth of the cautery corresponds to the size of two fingertips
If you wish to do so, also cautorize a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and if you want it can be a cauterization as round in shape.
After cautorizing the stomach punctures as mentioned earlier and if you wish to do so on the stomach according to the quantity desired attempt, also cautorize a point corresponding to that.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The cautery should be used to treat gout
If the pain in the feet is excessive and not relieved by cold or moist or large drafts entering through which part of the body normal function has been disturbed due to an excess escaping from that point, it is recommended that a doctor should be consulted as soon as possible; furthermore, he will try three cauteries on different parts of the foot.
The space between each Cautery should be proportionate to its size and also in relation to the length of the body part it is being applied to.
Don't exceed the recommended dosage of Cauteries.
If the quantity of this medicine is not adjusted according to the size and shape of the patient's foot, or if they are lying on their back; in any case, let them lie still as recommended, and elevate their legs.
It may be advisable to apply Cauteries on the skin if you are skilled in subtlety and caution.
If you exceed the Cauteries in the application and it is applied evenly throughout the body as well as the intestines coming out from there, this may indicate subtlety; but if not, consult a doctor
"The thirty-eighth chapter.
Cautery of a fistula in the abdomen
When the fistula or abscess in the abdomen is being opened and you want to know if that abscess is within the body of the abdomen or in its lining, pain occurs inside as well.
If it's within the abdomen's lining, then the pain is great and often times doctors lose patience when curing it.
Then cover the abscess with gauze and try to apply cautery as shown in another page. Cauterize over the abscess with a pointed cautery to stop bleeding within or outside of the abscess if it starts to bleed
Then cure that one by treating the other fistulas so they heal well.
Do not use this method of cautery unless you have studied the one whose length and breadth are great in medical arts known as malautias; also do not perform it if there is no need for that operation, or should any harm come to you, then stay away from it and ask forgiveness.
"The thirty-ninth chapter.
Cautery of pleurisy
When the joints ache due to cold humors that infiltrate every part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors
The first sentence translates to "Here comes the first cautery of the aristology area, please apply it with this method...
You must not hold your hand tightly while applying the cautery, and keep in mind that there is a needle involved during the process.
You should apply the cautery to those places where they use them in order to perform such an operation, and place it at that location between the ribs, ensuring that the needle is properly placed as well.
The surgery with the cautery should not be feared because it rarely happens at places that are not healing like an abscess or fistula which is not sanitary.
May I know what you meant by "Capitol .xxx."?
The opening of the fistula
When you have cured the fistula mentioned earlier and do not confirm your cure, the doctors will apply cautery in it as a second step, which is right-handed or left-handed depending on the length of the fistula and the figure of the cautery, whose shape has just been described.
Between each Cautery the size of a finger or less, and the hand motion of Cautery is the same as that used in the previous Cautery.
Do not touch your own hand while applying Cautery; instead, have another servant hold it steady on its two sides.
Another method is to apply Cautery while holding a cushion on its two sides; this causes the skin of the muscle to tear slightly, which closes the opening that leads to the abscess from the unhealthy vein.
The elevation you mentioned is one where you lift up your leg as much as possible to stretch the opening into it; this requires Cautery further down its length.
Insert a cushion between the two fingers and place your other hand on top of it in that area.
Apply Cautery after that, do four Cauteries.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And if necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Then come back when you have finished translating everything else.
Cautery of the intestines.
No cautery should be performed in the rectum, but only in the abdomen proper.
When you perform the cautery of the intestine, make sure that all these cauteries are in place and do not interfere with your procedure; then cauterize it into the abdomen, another one over the stomach, one over the liver, one over the spleen, two between the ribs on each side, a cautery in the right lower part of the chest, and another over the stomach. The depth of the cautery should be proportional to its specificity.
Place the cautery beneath in order for your hand to remain there for a long time.
And do not evacuate the intestine in order to keep it attached and allow for healing to occur.
The form of the cautery which is used to cauterize the abdomen should be slightly different than that which was previously used and shall be similar in shape only when it was previously used on the other side of the body.
When joint pain arises from cold humors that permeate every part of the body, especially in the feet, doctors customarily call it gout.
Cautery on the legs and thighs.
When the feet are inflamed and putrid, you should apply cautery on both sides of the foot between the earlobe and the thumb, elevating your hand to the cautery and not retracting it; then elevate your hand and do not return that which is used for water removal.
The cautery should be applied in this way: Apply two cauteries to each thigh, one on the outer edge of the cautery cut below the knee joint for each leg. The cauteries should be applied in this way: On the length of each thigh, put one on the front and another behind the calf joint for each leg, with two cauteries to each thigh.
Make sure the poultice is kept moist during this period of time so that no water remains in it.
After applying the cauteries to these causes as described,
Here is the next sentence to translate: Do not add any comments like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Cautery on the abdomen.
When the abdomen is inflamed and humid, you should first address the digestive and retentive ulcers in the stomach and intestines, after which you should apply a large cautery to the patient's stomach as described before on the stomach cautery, with the circle cautery along with four small cauteries within its circumference for the subtle border of the incision. Then, place another cautery above the sternum or two cauteries if desired.
When the excessive moistness of the patient causes intolerable pain, then the doctor cauterizes that part and cauteries on their belly and intestines to stop it from happening again in a short time
Chapter forty-four
About the ancient cautery
When there are ancient hemorrhoids or a great quantity of cold humors or corrupted moistness in the nature, and it is necessary to cure them as described earlier but no longer confers its effect, then the doctor cauterizes three points on either side of the anus with two small triangles, also cauteries for each umbilicus point.
If the stomach is enflamed and the veins of him are blocked, and his face becomes swollen, then the doctor cauterizes that on the stomach as described earlier; also an ulcer over the abdomen, a cautery over the small intestine, another one over the great vein, and lastly a cautery through the chest to cure it in some time.
Chapter fifty
About the cauteries of the abdomen
When you remove the abdominal viscera, then the doctor severs the cautery that was attached to it. When the heat is ignited in that vein, it causes a severe burning sensation to the cautery of that vein where one feels the pain.
Then apply the remedy that is recommended by doctors and place it in contact with those wounds where pain occurs so they can be healed
If you cauterize a large cautery on it, there will be more danger to young people.
Chapter 60 of the Capitularies (a series of legal texts).
Cautery for fingers that are affected by nature or in cases where injury has occurred.
When nature doesn't follow the remedy recommended for that location, and instead patient is troubled by it, they use cautery as treatment.
Therefore when a finger is affected by nature and it is already infected with moisture or corruption, do not apply cautery directly as one would for an open wound; instead apply the cautery gently on the depth of that particular place.
Put the cautery where it resembles a ray. After igniting that cautery on the fistula and considering its quantity by which one will penetrate into it.
Repeat this process with other cauteries depending on the quantity of need that you have.
When a nerve or vein is burned off and the fistula goes to the bladder or bowel area, then hold it in that place; do not do this unless you see that it's necessary.
Then clean the affected area as needed.
If the location is sealed up and all the materials have been removed for a long time, then it has already been completely cured.
If the materials are not out of that location or if there is corruption in them which has led to memory loss in that area, then come back and remember it later.
Chapter 77
Cautery of the nose.
When the nose is inflamed with pain or swelling and a physician wants to do bloodletting on that area, then cauterize that part of the body with a pointed cautery device which remembers the location.
After performing it on the second and removing a small one from it so that three will remain lined up in order for them to be useful later.
Chapter 58
Cautery of the bladder.
When the bladder burns and softens from friction or humidity so that urine is retained in it, then cauterize its outer surface by removing a small one beneath the bladder and placing another on top of the bladder as well as one near the right part and one near the left part.
When a pointed cautery is placed on the surface of each foot to treat pain caused by cold humors that have infiltrated into all parts of the body, it may be necessary to make two cauteries in locations that are lower than the first.
The second cautery is placed after the process has begun.
This is a line from Virgil's work 'The Aeneid'.
Cautery on the artery.
If the artery is infiltrated and humidified, it is forbidden to perform any incisions nearby, and corrupts the organs of the body, delays their production, and causes pain that spreads throughout the body, therefore, doctors say that when this occurs the artery should be cauterized with three cauteries in its circuit as mentioned for the vesica's cautery; or two cauteries, whichever is necessary.
This is a line from Virgil's work 'The Aeneid'.
Cautery on the dislocation of the artery.
When the artery is infiltrated and humidified to one side of the artery's cavity, it causes pain in that area and makes it seem as if a fistula has developed there; therefore, it is customary for doctors to treat with cautery extended on the other side to compare them, hoping to determine which side it originated from. The location of the dislocation is above mentioned in this line.
When you have opened the patient's legs and placed cushions beneath them, another servant must go between their thighs to hold them down as they writhe around in pain; at that point where the part is most inflamed should be cauterized, so that it will stop bleeding from the inside of the circle.
And if you wish to cauterize any other parts, such as the stomach
If that isn't available then the doctor will cauterize another part of the patient's body.
The second cautery should be done according to the amount of heat applied across the entire incision, and with care that it heals properly.
I am sorry but there is no conclusion in your message after this line. Could you please provide me more context?
Cauterize the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the inflamed part of the body and it is humid and moist, the patient should be treated with hot compresses or artificial pills, but if that doesn't work then you must cauterize the gouty vein.
The second part of cautery is to either cauterize with medicinal treatments or fire.
The second part of cautery is to either cauterize with medicinal treatments or fire through a third vein, which should go into the deepest part of it. When there's a space between two legs of equal size, place it between them as if to support or hold them together
Place four points on each side of the head towards the front so that they are at an angle across in front of one another
If you wish to, cauterize around the circle that has been traced out in the cautery of the dislocation, and it should be a continuous circle covering the whole circumference.
That is how to cauterize when pain adheres to the angle and does not spread into the cavity.
If pain spreads into the cavity, then apply two cauteries over the area of the body where it hurts and one cautery on each side at the bottom just above the foot to prevent the spread from further down the leg.
If the cutaneous cautery is used and its depth proportional to the extent of the pain.
If the patient insists that the pain extends into the location below their toes then they apply the cautery here between three or four points depending on how much it needs to be applied.
If the patient insists that pain will not spread into the cavity then they apply a cutaneous cautery here.
"When performing any cautery procedure, do not apply the last cautery until you have cooled it and your hands are numb to prevent burns or frostbite.
"You have already performed a cautery on the thigh and later in another place of it, but if the cautery is applied to the foot, the vein may become inflamed, leading to damage or perforation. "In order to give a quick solution for belly problems and save life.
"If pain occurs in two or more consecutive attacks, cauterize each one separately after this fashion.
"The wise ones say in the cautery of this fashion, make it like a circle where the center is half the size of an index finger and each radius should be slightly less than that.
"Draw that circle and another third. And make the space between their quantity of notes in proportion to each other. And put these circles next to each other with equal distance, so they are touching at a point.
"Then light it on fire until you see sparks, and after that pause over the first part of it, holding the affected area with your hand. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary to call gout when there is pain in the feet
Then, apply it three times with a damp cloth, then place the poultice on the body and leave it for several days, and care for it if it becomes healthy.
Oh, sons, of this kind of cautery that we are used to by the fear of cutting off life, and for which many people turn away in disgust.
The bad cauteries on him who suffers, and hold tight onto it with that spot of his.
The cauteries of the medicine are that you should make two circles with a perforated hoop, through which the frog's mouth is opened in order to let it go out; and long duration and newness must be maintained for as many times or until they say so.
If the space is between which there is a measurement of the thickness of that thing, and it goes in, its surface will be increased by them. And if they are inserted into this form
And then place your hand on the opening of the anus, and cover it with a cloth; and pour water drop by drop into two circles, its quality being made little by little, you do this for one hour, and suffer from the pain in the anus and the adhesion of it - which is as if they were fire - until they cease.
To raise your hand to the instrument and remove any excess water from all over the area you are working on.
To allow it to rest for three days and place a bandage over the body part that is inflamed, and leave it there for another few days, and then apply some poultice; this is done in young people.
To cure someone who has fallen ill.
If the pain extends into the chest or abdomen, lay it flat on something that contains water to prevent it from swelling further.
This is the way of removing excess water, and you have already seen it in the treatment on the correction of medicines. A recipe for a paste of alkali and mustard that does not completely cover the burn or abrasion but leaves enough to penetrate through slightly; in proportion to what enters it way
The bottom of the blister or abrasion should be covered with another wet cloth and put on top of it some alkali and mustard paste that absorbs water in such a way that when you apply them to your hand for good compression, it will keep the burned area moist
To adjust all that water, put on top another live mustard and another alkali paste, which will increase the pain relief, which is administered in surgical procedures of medicine and in cauterization of other parts, which operation does burn.
When it is necessary to use wide cauteries for medicines that are to be applied externally and internally at the same time, then apply them gently with a warm cloth or napkin soaked in medicine
The surgery and treatment for the cure of ancient pain in joints (ancient gout) and sciatica veins is to be performed by a skilled and experienced surgeon who will make all necessary precautions, ensuring that no other treatments are required unless otherwise specified, and if so, to use them gently as prescribed, taking great care not to let them touch anything else.
The surgeon is to make sure that the treatment is done smoothly and without a hitch; if not smooth, then it should be tried again recently; and after making this effort, place them gently in the part of the body where the pain occurs, or under one leg, or on both legs, depending on which.
The surgeon is to place them for three hours or the amount of time the patient takes to get accustomed to the application, depending on which.
The surgeon is then to introduce them into their body and when the chest is completely closed, introducing them into the ground, as this will cause pain to cease and be cured.
You know that you are not to apply those medicines using a cautery, but rather the evacuation of the bowels.
The surgeon should place the second cautery when a varicose vein is to be cauterized and hold it in between both these ways: first put one of them into hot oil; then place one over the foot and another between the toes, depending on which.
And fasten a bandage tightly to the wound, and place it so that it lies flat And apply this remedy, without ceasing to do it until the itching sensation goes away and relieves the pain.
This cautery method is called caustic cautery.
Chapter 42
Treatment of joint pain
Joint pains are caused by cold and damp influences, due to excess bleeding or excessive urination, or from causes related to them, like infiltration of wet and humid matter.
Cautery should not be used except in this specific case where it is caused by the emission of damp matter.
Therefore, place the tablets in such a way that they cover the pain as much as possible along each line of the body, and if you wish to apply it on any line separately from the others, based on how much space is available for the tolerance of the patient and their condition.
And that cautery should be applied punctually.
If you wish, apply three cauteries or four cauteries on the medial collateral ligament as follows:
Chapter 43
The opening of a bloodletting.
The beginning of the illness in children is marked by redness and swelling around the genitals, which causes discomfort when touching them.
The thighs and buttocks of the patient begin to swell as well as other joints affected by gout.
When you want to prevent it, apply a cautery in this way: Cauterize all parts of the joint simultaneously.
If you wish, cauterize a line or two lines in the course of the joint with the cautery. Place them evenly between them.
Apply it carefully in such a way that you can say what has been said.
Do not apply the cautery if you are also having a stroke or spasm of nerves.
The end of this medical treatise.
Closing of gout and joint pain treatment.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Then cure the cause of gout and prevent further pain, apply a cautery to soothe it.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The method you describe sounds like a procedure used to treat gout, where a pointed tool (cautery) is applied directly to the affected joint, causing pain and inflammation in order to stimulate healing.
If it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed tool or cautery. If the pain occurs in both hands or feet and it's necessary to apply points with a cautery tool on all of them, then apply that tool on each of them separately.
If the cautery is necessary for this treatment, then apply it only on the affected joint and not beforehand, just cover the area with a bandage.
If pain occurs in both hands or feet, then apply the cautery as you described earlier.
If the pain is only in one or both of these parts mentioned earlier, it's customary to apply a cautery on that part and those two lines.
If the pain persists in these parts mentioned earlier, then apply a cautery on each of them separately and over your hand as well.
When joint pain occurs in joints or muscles, then doctors apply a cure to all parts of the body.
Do not evacuate the patient without proper medication and follow-up care if the cure is applied incorrectly it may cause harm to the patient
This text seems to be a continuation of another medical treatise or passage, but its meaning has been lost over time. It could be related to the use of cautery for healing purposes.
Cautery on wounds.
When a hernia is located in the groin and intestines are protruding from it, then that should be treated as an emergency; doctors recommend that you feed the patient their normal diet on the day following the operation to ensure they recover properly and use gentle causes to prevent any opening of the wound in their abdomen.
Continue to hold the patient between their thighs with both hands over the area so that they cannot touch the wound or intestines.
Then return to the position you were in before, and try to hold onto it so that the rupture does not happen near or on your fingers which are similar to an average circle at the base of the hand.
Then apply the cure by which this is done, namely the cautery
into or out of your hands Return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Prepare the cautery to apply over that part of the body, and enter into an interval where you can make incisions on both sides at once; if there is not enough time for this in one interval, then do it sequentially with two intervals.
Observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery process to prevent it from escaping through a hole and causing harm or great injury.
You know that when you perform the cautery without incisions, don't do the operation.
The cautery for children should be milder than for adults and adjusted to their size.
Prepare the area for three days before it is healed from the fire's scar.
Do this with respect to other people you encounter so that they may be healthy as well.
The patient should sleep on their side for eleven days, ensuring the area is covered and protected from external contamination.
"The patient's bowels should be examined thoroughly in relation to the length of time that has passed since their last bowel movement; otherwise, they may not have been emptied properly.
"When you want to get rid of it in the next few days, the doctor will provide a treatment that is gentle and may take up to another few days.
"The food regimen includes avoiding meat and alcohol as well as being very thirsty; when following this regimen of health care, illness will certainly not occur.
"The doctor will cauterize the rupture in another part of the abdomen and start with it, so that they are not delayed, the doctor cautorizes the rupture through a pointed cautery according to its size; and when treating this way as we have said, do not adjust.
"The first rupture would be cautorized through a triangular pointed cautery according to this form; and when trying it out, hold tightly.
"Stop the bleeding with a tourniquet applied to the area of the rupture, and place another hand on top of it; then remove your first tourniquet as soon as possible.
".66
"Cautorizing the wound.
When the pain occurs in multiple joints or continues for a long time and does not subside despite medical care, then apply cautery punctures
And if the cauteries are applied to all parts of the body in proportion and variety, and location and pain, do so.
Then if the cautery is applied to the first joint, it's done; otherwise, repeat on that part with another cautery until the pain subsides at that location.
Chapter 57
The cautery for Leprosy.
Cauteries are applied to the affected areas in young people and even when there is a specific type of leprosy due to putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
When you want to cauterize that affected area, consider if leprosy is common and whether the treatment has been done in division or not, nor this one, and be afraid lest the corruption penetrates all over the body of him and all his completeness, then cauterize it on top with cautery points: at one spot near the head, at another point from him, shave off the hair at the end; at both ears; and at last behind, in the nape or feathers.
When the pain is unbearable from large vapors, then make a small incision in their mouth and cut through the nerves to alleviate the choking of the vapors. And if it is necessary, burn with a pointed cautery over the middle
If the leprosy has spread across the patient and is very evident, then you should burn those cauteries that we have mentioned earlier on his head; also above the nose, two over each of their shoulders, two over both elbows, one over each ankle, two over both hips, one over the chest, a second over the back, two over the arms, one over each arm, two over the thighs and one over each thigh. Burn these cauteries on all joints of his limbs, as well as those below their feet and at the bottom of their feet
Keep from burning any nerves that are above this line to prevent them being damaged.
Some veins should be burned with a single cautery over the throat and another over the stomach, as well as one above the intestines.
You know that for as many joints you burn cauteries, the more severe and frequent they are; also know that if a patient is not experiencing pain from those cauteries, then this means their chest has already been burned in such a way that it becomes inflamed.
When joint pain occurs due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and foot pain arises, it is commonly called gout by doctors.
Then gently rub with coarse powder
48th book of the Capitula
Cautery on gout.
When any member is stony or stiff and it's being treated with medicine, if the numbness does not subside, then you should cauterize that member using the pointed cautery after determining whether its size is great or small.
Then let him open a vein with very little blood pressure. Then gently rub that member with coarse powder until the numbness subsides.
All the veins of that member are cauterized to prevent numbness in the hands and feet, and it releases the tension from the nerves associated with that member, thereby eliminating the numbness.
Do not worry about this unless you are also examining the anatomy of the member and its exit from the nerves throughout the moving body.
49th book of the Capitula
Cautery on gouty fever.
When the gout is acute and does not respond to the intake of medicine, you should cauterize over that member with a pointed cautery after determining its quantity in relation to the size of its cavity, so that it becomes white and red again, then changes color.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and causes pain in the feet, it is customary to call it gout among doctors.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Cautery for wounds.
When a tumor is suspected and you want to remove it, the doctor will make incisions around its circumference as needed in order to remove it completely.
The healers warned that the incision should be made with utmost care in order to avoid complications and prevent infection.
It is recommended that the cautery incision follow the tumor's circumference as closely as possible, or it may be necessary to make multiple incisions.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Cautery for ulcers.
When any ulcer is suspected and treated with cautery, whether it's for excessive wetness or the state of the patient, which causes decay in a few weeks, or due to old age, you want to heal the ulcer through cautery; the doctor will make incisions around its circumference as needed.
When you want to perform a cautery incision, first make sure the cautery is ready and pause it in this place so that it doesn't penetrate further into the body.
If the cautery is already at that location and has caused harm to the arm, then apply a bandage over it to prevent further damage.
"This text seems incomplete or possibly incorrect.
Cautery incision
Corrosive material causing damage to the member, which causes it to rot and dry out when exposed to heat
Then if corrosive material occurs in the location where a cautery was applied with heat, then doctors usually apply cauteries sparingly and cautiously in that specific location.
Then if you cauterize the entire surface to prevent all corrosion without causing any harm to it.
Then apply it for three days and pause on the cauterized locations so that all scabs are removed and all corrosion is prevented.
Then apply it to regenerating flesh (tissue).
Then repeat the cautery on that which is rotted in the locations of corrosion if healthy skin does not appear or regenerate.
When a patient has acute medicine, which should be used in place of cautery Cautery may not be used if the patient is young
If a patient has acute medicine in their division, then remove it when they have need of cautery.
.
Cauterization of the closure and other similar ones.
Gout attacks the foot and is caused by excess fluids, which are excreted through urine. It is customary to use cautery in such cases on the second day of the attack; that is, cautery for warmth and cautery with cold water.
Cautery with fire should not be used in conjunction with similar remedies that could cause an excessive loss of fluids, which would indicate a second attack is imminent. The severity of the loss should be taken into account when deciding on the use of such cautery.
Then place your hand over it and move the hand towards the cautery in the path of the gout until the cautery reaches the bottom of the gout. The attack will last for three days once it begins. Then place a poultice of salt on top and leave it for one night to help draw out the toxins.
The first line translates as "Then return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity.
"Then return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity.
Then take them to those who will administer them on all of their parts in the body.
"Then return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity.
The end of the text.
Cautery for tremors.
When you want to cautery for tremors in the nerve or because of fever caused by cold humors, or any other cause like that, doctors do this: they cauterize it with four points, and between each spine there's a cautery; also on the chest of them, and on their stomach.
The tremor of him shall cease and bring about recovery in his illness.
When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, pain occurs in the feet; it's traditionally called gout.
Cautery on the abdomen
Cautery on the abdomen, and pustules form in those parts filled with corrupt materials; so that at the beginning of it, a cautery is applied over all part of the fistula by a subtle cautery, extending to its end; or by a long cautery; or by a lenticular cautery.
Cautery on the abdomen at the beginning of its expulsion following this manner, and do not cauterize superfluous veins that are causing it, but cure them instead.
However, I want to mention that this is a form of phlebotomy.
When joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, pain occurs in the feet; it's traditionally called gout.
Cautery on the abdomen incision of artery
Superfluous veins that end in the artery may be cauterized to seal off the gap or to cauterize the member itself; and if it is difficult to restore them, they will have to go away.
Therefore, when such occurances happen to the artery of yours, you must touch with a pointed cautery on the orifice of the artery, and place your hand over it so that no superfluous vein comes out;
And then place a cushion on top of the heated cauteries slowly, gradually, one by one, and exhale over those to be extinguished.
And then gently place a cushion on the small or large artery where it is broken in such a way that you can see the vein very clearly, and put in the cautery to be extinguished and tightened that artery.
If the artery is pulled out when you remove the artery tie and extinguish the cautery, then apply another cautery quickly from the ones that are prepared in the fire, so do not stop doing this until the artery is tightened again.
And remember to not touch the nerve here unless there's another harm in it as well.
You know that when the artery breaks, it is impossible to tighten it in such cases except for four possibilities: burn cautery like this one, extract if not extracted or tightened by force stretching of the limbs are inflamed and restricted, be faithful or firm constriction, or have pauses on medications that limit blood flow, which should be strict.
He who administers excessive restriction of the limb and tightening on the dressings or by positioning that causes inflammation and contusion, it is not advisable but harmful.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call it gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
incision, perforation, and ventilation; for abscess, pleurisy, and similar things
In the first chapter of a medical treatise, there are discussions on cauterization and its use in medicine as well as the causes and methods for performing cauterization procedures; also order the chapters from the top to the bottom of the body.
You will proceed in this chapter according to that method so that it may be understood by those who request it.
And when you start doing this, father, son, learn that in this chapter we discuss the procedures of cauterization.
When great care is taken in the operation of this sort, as during which kind of operation it is necessary to use caution? During which type of operations are there often fear and trembling, and in the worst cases can lead to death?
Are you saying that during some operations people may go crazy? Are you referring to the fear of death that comes with learning about one's illness?
Do these refer to illnesses which are fatal and deadly?
Do not agree to anything that seems suspicious or doubtful. And show great caution and patience while learning about it.
Use the knowledge of all your illnesses to predict and indicate what will lead you to health, so that you may have wisdom and glory.
Oh, sons of God, send your understanding now, not your direction or protection; for in this manner alone is wisdom given to you.
When the pain of joints is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors
The first sentence translated means: "The purpose of this chapter is to explain how to treat gout as a disease involving the joints.
Of the treatment for water, which is contained in the first part of the chapter,
"You can use this medication to treat gout and you should take it before meals to prevent the liver from becoming inflamed.
These treatments are used in case of an unexpected condition that is not known or described, but could potentially cause pain and inflammation.
You should not use this medication in children unless you also have seen death and so it is advisable to consult with the doctor immediately.
If a child has water-filled ears that are extremely large and the child is about to die due to the severity of their condition, it may be necessary to pierce through the skull bone in order to release the water from the ear canal as quickly as possible to prevent death.
This humidity may be between the jawbone and the skull bone or around the scalp.
If the humidity is between the jawbone and the skull bone but small, then it's advisable to make a small incision at the latitude of the skull bone. The length of this incision should be such that if you cut through the moisture there will only be skin exposed, so as not to expose any underlying tissues.
When humidity increases and the apostle is larger, joints become affected by gout in this way.
If the humidity is removed, then it means that you times remove the capillaries from all parts of your head and water spurts when you come into contact with them You will find three openings in the place where your hair touches, in this way.
After removing all humidity, you need to repair the breaches in the fabric and linings of garments as well as mend any holes that may appear on the ground or in the water; it is necessary also to attend to cleanliness by washing thoroughly at least once every five days, if moisture content is not satisfactory.
Another way to prevent this is by considering the size of the apostle and collection of water, because some vessels may be enlarged in the occiput or lateral areas, on the right or left side; it is necessary then to attend to where the apostle and water are seen, and do so whenever possible.
Note that it is necessary to avoid cutting the artery in order not to harm or kill the gout by removing moisture from this source of moisture removal.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
When endowing the arteries or veins of the head or chest, and it is customary to do so, and not rely on these medications for treatment in this case, healing will begin from these two arteries.
When you want to insert those that the patient wants into his head, and make sure there is a very tight grip so that the arteries open up and tighten around it; then take care of where the vein lies below it, and hide all the rest from above
Then place the artery tip on the skin and insert it gently into each part of the head individually towards the mouth, as this is for the latitude of the head.
If you want to enter the artery and withdraw it from the places mentioned above.
The length of the incision should be adjusted to two digits, so that when a vein is inserted there will be a pulsatile flow out which indicates an artery, preventing it from being used frequently.
When you find yourself in a situation where the artery is not seen on examination, it indicates that there are three centimeters of space between the artery and the skin, so you should try to reduce this gap as much as possible, and finally approach the patient.
This is the quantity of vein that you need to get rid of completely and quickly, as well as all other quantities which appear from the surface of the patient and the artery's opening on them.
Consider using a bandage instead, and if the cause of the infection is not seen on examination, then apply this to ensure that it does not spread any more
Then stretch out the bandage tightly around the patient's arm and legs as well, and place it so that its surface is towards their face.
This is the third paragraph of a document.
Extract all arteries from those parts.
When an old or hardened artery occurs in the temples, which is painful to touch and has a thick consistency like iron, it should be treated with caution and not confused with any other ailments; if this happens, we will extract all arteries from these parts either by cauterization as shown or by medicine.
The procedure and extraction of these arteries is to shave the patient's head for those in the temples; and understand that the artery is hidden unless it is pressed firmly by its own pulse, as it is covered with a thick layer of fat.
When the patient is covered up, pain in the thighs shall be tightly bound with a band or cloth; and when it is placed in an area where evaporation occurs, you should cover it immediately to prevent exposure of the wound clearly. The phrase "the manner" refers to how the treatment is applied or performed on a patient. You should tighten it (the band or cloth binding the pain) as much as possible until the area is completely covered to prevent exposure of the wound clearly.
If the artery is subtle, wrap it around both of those areas tightly; when cutting into that, ensure you make cuts at equal intervals along the length of your arms and legs to prevent damage to nerves as well, unless otherwise indicated by a doctor
And then pull away from the wound after three.
If the area is large, wrap it around two separate points firmly but not tightly, and do not cause the flesh to rot while maintaining integrity of the bandage and prevent damage to nerves.
Then cut off any excess that is between two threads, or if necessary do it at another time.
If desired, cautery the area with cautery applied to the skin around the incision site as necessary cuts are made outside of that location.
When the patient has fever or severe heat, it is customary for the cautery to be used in these causes that aid in final dryness, and therefore it is most beneficial at this time.
It is important to properly apply the poultice on the external parts of the body, so that it adheres well to the anti-contraction area and is placed gently over the patient's belly; furthermore, the doctors of gentle care are to prevent harm from injury or burns by applying warm cloths in order for healing to be successful.
When performing any other medical procedure on the abdomen area, you should ensure to restrict that particular artery, or cautery, by placing your hand over it, and then squeeze tightly to prevent bleeding from occurring. If there is no specific cause for the bleeding at that time, it is customary to place a damp cloth over the area in order to cool and control the bleeding, and tighten tightly thereafter as well.
When cauterizing the vein through two needles, make sure to place both of your hands on that area in order to hold it down and prevent it from moving around or coming out of the body's extremities where they are not consolidated with this cautery
The method of treatment
And the sharpness of two needles is necessary. However, if the sharpness of two needles is too much, you should pierce each one separately and not rush into the skin at high speed.
So, when there is no excess heat in those areas and the flesh is removed completely.
This method is best for all cases and most simple.
And the space between two needles should be a measure of its thickness.
The fourth part.
Of the treatment for the burns on the hands and feet.
When burns are on the face and veins that are above the head, which can interfere with healing in this situation there is no medical cause for treatment except to apply ointment over them, making sure not to touch any other parts of the body while doing so because the pain from applying the ointment will be severe.
And you command to the patient remove the hairs on their forehead, and then cut three slits at an equal distance apart along the length of their forehead. When the length of the fissure is as follows: The first fissure is exactly at the same distance from the nose to the end of the lower lip in front and the second one by a little less than movement of the eyelashes which are located on the other side
Keep your hands at an angle and continue to press down on both temples as you move your jaw downward Adjust the space of each incision by three times.
Apply wet dressings or damp cloths to the affected parts where you want to dry them up.
Place two sharp instruments between which form this incision as follows: It's from the beginning of the temples to the second incision. Exclude it from the code between two incisions of which one is above the nose and another at the beginning of the second incision. Apply it to this dressing and insert another one called a scalpel into the first incision from both sides separately but not together.
Pause the stitches from adding flesh and leave space in the skin along the lines of incision, leaving space for the stitches to go through as they pass towards the fissure, and remove all the veins descending from the head down towards the toes.
The first sentence suggests that a professional should continue to apply pressure on this specific location until the abscess drains or comes out through another opening in the skin.
This sentence suggests that when applying pressure for a prolonged period of time to an abscess, you should alternate between pressing on different areas of the patient's leg.
This sentence indicates that you should take breaks from pressing on each opening in order to avoid numbness or tingling of the fingers and toes, with the understanding that any pressure applied at an angle may cause this sensation as well.
The third sentence suggests that on the third day you should apply a poultice of warm water and honey or tea to treat the sores, as well as encouraging others into doing so in order for the wounds to heal.
This is not a complete question or statement. It appears to be an abbreviation that means "End of the matter.
This sentence suggests that treatment for headaches and falling blood pressure are among the things that should decrease as one moves from a higher to a lower level.
The sentence suggests that as pressure is applied and continued on the patient's head, they will begin to feel an immediate relief of pain from headaches and other conditions related to blood circulation, but if any veins are ruptured by applying too much pressure or in the wrong location, it could cause further complications.
"The first thing you should do is to tell the patient to raise their head, and then make a small cut in that part of the forehead, slightly towards the temple (and if it's on the left temple, go from front to back). Then, incise an incision into the skin of the nose, extending downwards.
"Dry out any remaining blood or fluids and then close the wound with two strips of adhesive tape. "Then, take a needle and thread, put it through both holes in the bandage, making sure not to pull too tight.
"When you've made the incision and it is clear that the abscess has diminished, cover the wound with some ointment containing flour from wheat two parts, and colophonium four parts mixed in water, then apply this mixture to these wounds as they are native.
"Capitol VI
"Take care of the cure like that.
"All the causes for which you take care of those ulcers are four kinds: whether it is one kind of mineral cause or effect; whether it's plant based, such as garlic or beans; whether it is fluctitious, such as water and urine; or any other kind.
When the cause seems similar to one of those causes that do not fit or agree with the patient's case and pause the treatment, if necessary, administer an extract from a remedy. To remove any obstructions in the patient's body and to start the treatment again if necessary, loosen the thread or yarn surrounding the affected area and apply it gently over the parts of the body as needed, because these causes are often associated with certain treatments.
If not removed already, administer an extract of the remedy in a subtle manner using the instrument known as 'the feather and silk' which is used like this.
If already removed, then it is done successfully, or if not yet removed the doctor administers an extract of the remedy in a subtle manner with little repetition.
If not yet removed, the doctor inserts a needle with hot oil and threads it into the vein on one side of the patient's arm and clamps off the other end to prevent the needle from being withdrawn, ensuring that there is no obstruction in the vein. To prepare it for injection and ensure that you do not miss any veins because of its strong pull back
If not already removed in this manner the doctor takes an elastic band or ribbon of suitable size and attaches it to a nearby point on one side, then ties another end to prevent the bandage from being drawn back The first sentence translates to: "Place a cushion under their thighs and one on each leg, another on the chest, holding their hands.
"If there is not enough space to accommodate all the causes that you mentioned earlier, then it would be advisable to perform a pointed cautery or application of warmth.
"The manner in which to perform this procedure is that you should first make the patient lie flat on their back and stretch out their second leg, then apply pressure over the area of their chest, and place a cushion under them for support. "If you find that the lunar figure rupture has occurred and the patient is unable to use their hands as instruments, then you should apply pressure with your own hands in order to stop it and care for the wound until it heals.
"If the cause for the hernia is one of those that you mentioned earlier and they are inflamed, then treat with care and extract them. However, if these symptoms do not subside over time, take a small amount of mild ointment in order to ease it. "Apply an incision over the area where they have occurred on their hernia.
"Do not do this if you think that the hernia has already been healed by the heat of their body or the moisture from it, and stop doing so when they are cold to avoid further injury.
When the patient's abdomen is to be opened, first place a cushion under their thighs; another servant on their legs and one more on their chest holding their hands. Then do not cease until the water is closed up, that it may be said to have been done properly
Then do not cease until the water is closed up, that it may be said to have been done properly Then place one end of it into the abdomen and stretch the other out towards a point where movement is restricted to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Then place the other end and do as described earlier until the water is closed up, stretching it with a pointed instrument to open it out of its cavity
Then place the beast's exit into that cavity; if it is a small one, stretch and hold it like in the division, but if it is large enough to cause damage from being pulled out, the doctors will simply cut off its head and causes of it are dealt with as other causes which may be found in the abdomen.
In the hollow of a newly generated ear lobe when you cure that ailment as mentioned in section and treatise on distillation there will be no confusion about your care, therefore ensure that you examine the ear lobe gently but thoroughly
And if there is no cause for worms, the doctor will insert a long needle and draw out all of it. Then introduce the needle gently into the ear lobe as much as it can reach without causing harm to the patient; and after that, do what is necessary with strong suction force, removing all the worms thoroughly.
If not all the worms are gone at this time, the doctor will pull and close off the circuit of the needle as instructed; then administer the distilled water that has already been used in the previous treatment for worms, holding tightly onto it to be used in the treatise on distillation.
And that is how you finish off with the medical remedies given at this instrument, which is in fact a needle of that sort. And take what comes out and put it into another container slightly smaller than the first one.
Then, when you are inserting the needle in the patient's abdomen to drain pus or other fluids, this will be necessary here. "If you wish, take the tube and insert it gently into the patient's stomach, or into a cavity of no specific herb, or that which you want from these medicines in an artery - and this is at the wrist - and press against your palm to prevent rapid expulsion from the stomach and the patient feeling pain.
"And that which is inserted into the artery will also burn on contact with a small flame. "Remember that if the cause which you are going to inject into the artery is too cold, then these medicines from the artery will not work.
"Goodbye.
"With care of injecting the artery.
"Do not perforate the artery in addition to making a hole through the muscle or flesh; do this for punctures outside of your field only. And puncturing holes should be done on the back side of the artery so that it does not come out, and puncturing holes will have their own separate procedure.
"And if this happens on the back side of it, which does not comprehend its meaning, is in major difficulties for treatment.
In that space where you place a cushion for the patient's thighs, put an additional cushion under their knees, watch over them closely. And if there are times of extreme pain, then apply a more subtle poultice which is the form of it:
If the extremity of it where small in latitude, such that one part is acute and the other not, then apply a poultice with two layers to prevent injury to the cushion.
Then if application is to be made on naked skin of the thigh or buttocks, apply a poultice with the most delicate and incise the surface so that it penetrates throughout all the flesh.
And if application is to be made on the underside of the thigh, place a very delicate poultice lightly and put it into the meat of the buttocks.
And if the poultice application is so severe that it causes discomfort to the patient due to its severity, try to relieve pressure by ease and keep in mind not to press on the nerves of the thigh.
And after applying the poultice to the thigh as described above, wait until you are sure of its consolidation and if necessary add a second poultice which will be placed on top of it in order to soften it, and then pulverize over it with a damp cloth or something similar so that it is moist. If the cushion has already been applied before and has not been removed, apply another poultice as well, being careful not to cause injury while applying them.
When the vein flow of blood is impeded, the pain surges up or droops down with fluid that drips and falls on the ear lobe, and another servant uses a certain caution to restrict the flow of blood in order to make it stop.
The eighth capital
To cure the itch that comes from the eyes
The itching of the eyelids caused by cold humidity is treated with soft cloths soaked in vinegar or other remedies that are dry.
And if you have already opened the space between the ribs and legs, then place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
When the vein flow of blood is impeded, the pain surges up or droops down with fluid that drips and falls on the ear lobe, and you use a certain caution to restrict the flow of blood in order to make it stop.
The best caution is to burn the inflamed and irritated areas when they remain without a cause of their inflammation; and once burned, those areas are calmed down and do not return.
The ninth capital
To cure the redness of the eyes
The itching and redness of the eyelids caused by large causes that assemble in their strength and harshness is called for greater care.
Earmuffs
Therefore, the operation is that when the swelling occurs in this way on the eyelid and covers everything completely, then the cause of it must be liquid or mucus.
Then fasten up that tear in the latitude, and let it be as wide as possible so that you can easily remove it, then gently pull off that tear and remove it.
If the swelling is great, loosen your sutures and care for it until it heals.
If it is small then you will not find fault in that vein as long as the rest of its blood supply remains unchanged.
If the swelling is diminishing from all sides of the eyelid and you see it on its surface, then pain in this case is due to no cause.
Then fasten up the incision, let cool water run over it and care for the area until it heals.
Conclusion.
Of cure for this eye-ache in the eyelid of these
Of the cause of this eye-ache in the eyelid of these (people) born with a grey hue, and more prone to children than adults, makes their cheeks reddened and irritates them at sight; so that they may not look directly at those who have it
So that they may sometimes shed tears over the faces of those with it at night and while sleeping; so that their eyelids are wet from the excess of dampness, which has been inflamed by it and is about to burst through its own accord; and when you press on their temples (foreheads), you will find evidence of it.
No matter how many times they try to cover it up with bandage or cloth, the excess of dampness will always escape through a small hole in their forehead, and the small tear that is there will also burst; when you press on their temples (foreheads), you will find evidence of it.
In the first place you should be sure to have looked through all that comes in contact with it from every direction, and especially for any gray-colored openings, as soon as there is a tear or hole made by this condition.
Then remove that which you have wrapped around between the thighs, leaving it exposed and roll it up between your right hand and left hand until it is smooth.
Then cover it to prevent any damage from occurring on the scrotal skin, which could potentially cause injury or harm.
If not already applied, put it on the beginning of the tear to prevent any contact with the scrotal skin during this time, and then remove it afterwards; and proceed as follows:
And do so that you apply some salt in the cavity of the tear to prevent any excess moisture from remaining there.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
If the cut happens to be deep, then apply pressure to help prevent excessive blood loss and take care of it until it is healed.
11th chapter
Various types of treatment for the foot.
When examining the hands of the patient, you must check for natural burns and artificial wounds, then apply ointments containing astringents to heal them and prevent further damage from occurring, or else it could lead to destruction of the hand which is called "hand necrosis", and there are four types of treatment: cautery with fire; treatment by an acute medicine as mentioned in the chapter on cautery; use of stitches for wounds; or use of bandages.
"You should remove the cap from the patient's head and tie his left hand to your own left hand.
"Secure the eyelid in a fold and attach it to the lower lid, then gently remove the bandage or cloth from the eye, and place your hand over the eye.
"Please note that this step varies based on the amount of swelling around the eyelid, as it can vary in different individuals depending on how much swelling is present.
"Take one hand and place it above the two lines you have just drawn, then bring your other hand from the lower lid to the upper. "If natural tears flow as strongly as those in this example, do not worry.
"Place the spoon in one of two corners of a piece of bread and spread it across, then arrange both ends into a loop on top of your thumb or index finger; if you wish to do so, otherwise do not.
The wound of the field will be healed within three days or four
If you wish to heal the wound of the field quickly and efficiently, then remove all the moisture from it and stretch out its area as much as possible; may this healing be better than previous ones.
And maybe in that way the patient will get well quickly and efficiently, without any fear.
This other remedy in question is to apply it directly on the patient's eye as soon as possible, and after applying this way, elevate the patient's hand with three fingers spread out;
If it is not possible to do this way then take a needle with which you can pierce the eye and put it on that spot; enter another finger near the upper tear duct, one further near the lower one, and adjust between those fingers so that they are equally distant from each other, and after applying this elevation, raise your hand high in elevation, elevating all the way up to where is recommended as such.
Then place both lips of the wound together and heal it into shape.
If you cut your finger or hand off entirely, place that part of the body near and bind it to itself with twine; this is how you heal it.
"The eye is being squeezed between the eyelids," meaning that someone has placed pressure on both eyelids to prevent blinking or closing of the eyes.
To perform this task, you will need a cannula and some anesthetic agent (or anaesthetic). This means that you should stretch the eyelid and divide it into two parts as described in step 2, ensuring they are aligned in length (from top to bottom) and angle relative to your finger. You have injected into the extremities of both parts where you hold them.
Tighten the cannula of each part very gently so that it does not interfere with vision or cause any discomfort for extended periods.
If it's late and the wound is infected, then take care of the patient and treat the wound as necessary.
Once the procedure has been completed successfully (i.e., you have stretched and divided the eyelid into two equal parts), there will be no squeezing or pulling sensation felt by the patient.
This is how to perform this task using both cannulas There should be no minimum or maximum length and angle measurements for either part of the eyelid.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The physician makes a small incision into the flesh to relieve the pain.
If the pain is not natural and harsh, but occurs in the joints themselves, then the procedure is to make a small incision into the flesh there; hold it with a sharp pointed instrument close enough so that you adjust both of its extremities gently without losing sight of the tiny hole. The length of the incision should be about equal to the size of one palm.
Then you put another small needle next to it and fix its position if you wish.
Then hold the patient's head gently in place and secure it to prevent its movement during the subtle procedure.
Then insert the needle into the flesh with its point adjusted to pierce through as needed; make sure it penetrates just beneath the natural skin layer so that you can extract any necessary tissue.
Then take away the flesh between them and insert it into place; sew up one or two or three stitches to close the incision.
Then take away your hand from that part of the flesh and gently pull it out through the small hole in the skin, making sure not to pull it out too hard as you do this.
When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The physician will examine the affected area closely, making sure to feel around it and gently press on any tender spots, and lay a cloth over it for two or three days until the pain subsides from that place and arises no more at another location.
If the joint pain is severe and pressing on the skin, the physician will use a gentle touch to apply an ointment of natural substances onto it, or if that doesn't alleviate the problem then they should gently lift up the affected part and hold it there until the pain subsides from that location only.
Chapter 13.
Of curing an inflammation in the eyelid.
When an inflammation is present in the eyelid or if there's constriction of it on one side or the other part of the body due to poor circulation, edema, burns, and so forth, they call this "leporina," whether it be accidental or not, and it will either heal through natural means such as rest, proper diet, and use of ointments and compresses, or through similar actions.
When removing the bandage from the affected area make sure to separate any remaining tissues and place them in such a way that there is room for it between those bandages until they are healed.
When you have opened a space between the patient's thighs and placed cushions under them, another servant goes to their legs, and one more to their chest, holding their hands
In that case you should use something to cool down the cause of the illness, and then place another servant by their side
The purpose of your cure is that it should be performed continuously after the initial form has become solid
This operation, which we call a rectification of this shape-making substance that returns the form to its original state after it has been formed.
Capitoline Museums in Rome
The cure for this substance is applied to the eyeball itself.
This substance used in the form of a paste is called vertaderly and applied to the eye itself; it is either a natural or an accident.
The accidental application can be made by splashing, cutting, cautery or any other way.
The method of the application is that you insert a needle which has two folds and fix it in the skin, and then pass it from the inner tear duct to the outer one through the thread, until it comes out at both ends of the body.
When pain occurs in the feet And then return the fold of the eyelid when you say so, but otherwise, place a finger and pause in the folded position, and touch it to make the eyelid fold, and then make two cuts into the length of the eyelid edge.
And the fingers of both cuts at two angles of the incision should be made as if they were in agreement, and also from their sides when they meet in a fold.
The Greek letter for this is lambda ().
Then apply the flesh that way in order to make it stretch out the lobe of the ear as much as possible, then close the eyelid.
Then adjust the separate parts and sew them to the thread of wool, and then cure those by using the emollient medicines and oils that are recommended for healing.
If you need to open or close a puncture wound with a cautery, the doctor will instruct you to make the incision flat on the eyelid before proceeding. Then separate the cloth between two lips as instructed.
In the case of curing an injury when it is done or removed, and you are performing a surgery in preparation for cauterization, then that should be in the form of various cuts.
"The surgeon must prepare the body thoroughly for each of these procedures that can be performed so as to restore the figure to its original shape or form, and in the case of a hernia, after removing it.
XV
The adhesion between the eyelid and the conjunctiva or the cornea.
If this adhesion is solid and the eyelid becomes stuck to the album of the eye, it is forbidden for its ease of movement and natural functions; therefore you should enter a small slit on the edge so that the eyelid can be released, and then lift or extend as necessary.
If you suspect a small adhesion but not of the incisions themselves, then apply some oil to prevent it from causing discomfort during the operation and smooth over any roughness that doesn't interfere with the eye's surface.
The incision must be made to facilitate its return to normal shape and cure the adhesion.
Either apply salty water, or distill it with a solution that dissolves in water.
To separate the eyelid from its surface and to prevent it from swelling into the eye, take a break in applying oil-based products, then use third-day treatments that are adhesive so as to heal them.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The incision or elevation of the eyelids
When the eyelids are secondarily inflamed or excoriated, either due to nervous irritation (as might occur in an infected eye) or non-nervous due to a white and cold dew which when applied causes the eyelid to be closed over it, that is shut out of its place.
The latter tears do not respond in the same way as the tear ducts, which gradually cover the eye and prevent light from entering it.
The servant should close the patient's head in his lap, and place their hands over them, lift up the eyelid with your finger, gently press it back towards you to prevent its protrusion out, and repeat this several times until it is quiet. Take a small needle and make it penetrate the white part of the eyelid or eyebrow, or forehead, or nose, etc., by doubling its extremity very gently and keeping it in the middle of the eye, and inserting into that, and hold fast to the eyelid; and extend this until all is quiet, and remove the thread from the lash which was the pupil. When the pain in joints is caused by cold humors that permeate every part of the body...
...and pain occurs in the feet...
...and if it is necessary to make points...
...then do so with a pointed cautery...
...and return the intestine or hernia to its cavity...
...and place your hand over the area to prevent...
...the intestine or hernia from coming out. I'm sorry, but I don't understand the last part of your question. Could you please rephrase it? If the hernia is rarefied and confused, and you want to try something else...
...you can try something else instead of the pointed cautery...
And then start your operation on that very spot where he is in good health.
The onset of tearing in the eye should be treated promptly if it is due to a large lump, suspending its action on one side; and afterwards remove that lump by incision so that it does not flow tears out.
And then put the eye drops into the tear ducts gently, to ensure that they go directly to where he is healthy.
The seventeenth chapter.
From incision of the gallbladder and this which is born from the liver adjusted in the eye.
Some of the veins in the eyes are born with red hair and are over-padded around the pupil, or come close to it or press on both eyebrows heavily, making their eyelids tight together like the eyelid of an elephant.
The operation on him should pause his head in the tie so that he does not move around too much; and attach them to that part of the body as soon as convenient by using a pair of forceps or scissors; and begin incision into where everything is finished with a scalpel, and guard your hands from touching it unless you want to perform this operation.
And it is your incision at the place that we recommended in the incision of the gallbladder or at the edges where you need to be careful when it comes time for this operation.
When you have opened your incision and it is completely closed, the physician will sprinkle salt on it or distill oil of vitriol to cause blisters along with the healing ointments, and place a cushion over the painful part in order to prevent any further pain from coming through.
If no further cause of infection is found and the patient has been treated with cauterization, then apply ointment to cover the ulcer and cure the ulcer in this way that it falls off by itself, and similarly put a bandage on the affected area so as not to let the ulcer's pus out.
Even if the healing of the ulcer is done naturally or accidentally through any means you may use to treat it, do not apply your hand in any of these operations unless you see that this member has suffered from such an operation.
The eighteenth chapter.
About the treatment of ulcers.
The ulcer should be tested to find out its cause and prevented from being operated on immediately, and it is treated with ointments for a certain number of days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the outset to consider whether or not the ulcer in which the cause has been found is severe and if so another treatment should be sought for this, then apply ointment to that ulcer.
And it is that you command the patient to keep their head straight and upright, and support them with an arm on one side or another according to your discretion.
They will gradually be held in place on each side of the body like this.
And arrange them carefully and gently with the small veins so that they can be removed when needed without damaging or tearing them away from their original position.
Remember to not touch the extremities of your patient's foot with your hands; if you are performing surgery in an open area, and ensure that you do not inadvertently cut or damage those veins during your operation.
When you have completed the procedure, remove from the body any remaining incisions or bruises so that they do not cause further harm to your patient's health.
If this is not to your possible risk during that procedure, and you administer a painkiller for the duration of the days until the pain subsides and you ensure he is properly medicated.
And then apply a bandage over them to keep clean as well.
This is how the forefingers should be used.
The text you provided seems to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise, and it discusses various treatments for various ailments or injuries, including joint pain caused by cold humors infiltrating each part of the body and causing pain in the feet (which is referred to as gout). It also includes instructions on how to support someone with open wounds and how to administer painkillers.
The nasal passage is being opened up
When you cure the abscess with a cautery or acute medicine, before applying it and if there is no healing, ulcers will not heal but rather they will open up into the aperture of the body, causing leakage from them, extracting all the moisture that exists in them through pores as well as revealing the orifice.
And when it is revealed to him that he has been corrupted or blackened by sores, then the ulcers will treat his ulcer with a remedy of which kind?
The remedy is applied in the form of a pointed tip, and its effect will come to pass either gradually or subtly through punctures with lime or some other substance.
And when it is over the location of the ulcer on its part, you will arrange that between your fingers and press it gently bit by bit until you know that this corruption has been removed.
And in such cases, the ulcers are treated with dry and strict remedies.
If the location is healed and it is found to be good flesh and it was cut out of the body by a skilled surgeon for 10 days without infection or recurrence, you know that he has been cured.
"If not, the pain is in the abdomen, and secondarily to reduce the rupture to its form of a nose, secondly this manner; it is customary for you to break open as if performing a quick surgery, or with medicine.
"With the triangle of the abdomen, the fist of it should be extended to its extremity as well.
"And place your hand at the eye socket, and one below it; put your hand a little beneath the head, and return it to the mouth as you enter.
"After that, restore the location with immediate strictives as soon as possible.
"Therefore, after that the flesh and location are restored, the matter is returned to the nose; then you place it on the patient.
".XX.
"Reduction of the prominence of the heel.
"When the heel emerges completely without pain or reduction of size, then you will know that gout has occurred; and immediately apply pressure on it to prevent the appearance of swelling in the calf of the leg.
The sheets of sand are to be spread out for the patient, each sheet doubled in four places; and these sheets must be spread
Place one on top of the other according to the quantity needed. Stretch tightly over these sheets, also apply ointments to relieve the itching and scratching; and open your veins for the application of the day's ointment.
If the ligament is relaxed, then it should not be stretched further.
Stretch also the ligament and apply day's ointment as well.
If the pain has already subsided, then it is done; otherwise continue applying ointment to the thighs and stretch gently while being careful not to cause any harm.
The end of the treatise.
This is the beginning of a new section of the tunic.
When the disruption in the tunic occurs and it is urgent to perform an operation on that part of the body, approach with a grain of salt; enter into this procedure as you have recommended so far, insert your needle through the eyelid from below at its point of insertion, and place another needle on the opposite side.
When pain occurs in the foot, apply a pointed cautery to make points on it.
Then return the intestine or hernia back inside its cavity and prevent it from coming out.
Then wrap a bandage around the foot and adjust it snugly to prevent any further bleeding, apply ointment containing alum, and descend on him/her.
Then return to health.
Chapter 22 of what?
Of eye care.
The ailment commonly called ophthalmia is nothing more than a swelling in the foot that resembles an upward-growing water blister and isn't one.
In doing so make sure to put the patient on their back and straighten them out completely, and put your head between two of his/her feet as well, making it easy for you to see when the swelling comes up and prevents its descent, keeping light available and without descending or ascending, causing the ailment.
If not in the foot, then it's a water blister.
When the swelling descends to below the eyelid, place a small bandage at the corner of the eye and make sure that the swelling does not extend beyond it.
"After being opened up, the doctor will pour hot water on it that is mixed with salt or other substances.
And after doing so, there are various causes for which the pain may arise.
Chapter 22
The doctor will pour water from a hot source into it.
Having poured the substance of the water into the cavity and declared which is to be perforated by being marked as a symptom indicating the illness.
The doctor will place it between your thighs on a heated plate and then seal its edges with wax to prevent leakage of the liquid inside.
Then place your hand over the surface of it and hold them in position so that they do not move around as much if the liquid inside is water or another substance.
Then place your left hand over it and hold them in position so that they do not move around as much if the liquid inside is on the left side of you.
Then place the eyelid above and hold it in position with your hand so that you do not accidentally scratch or touch your eye as a result of the liquid inside.
Then insert it into the eyelid and be cautious, for fear that its movement may provoke a tear as well.
And the first sentence to translate is: "And the space between the patient's thighs should be measured and maintained at a certain width, which is that of a small pupil entering into the end of the iris, and is the size of a sclera.
"And the water should be kept in a certain location, and place your arm below it with another, then if the water descends too much, the doctor will come to treat them where they can see properly.
"Then pause for a short time, and if the water is descending too much, do not remove the other arm from where it is placed.
"And when it is so and does not descend, the doctor will extract the intestine gently, and roll around with his little finger for a short time, and place a small amount of clear salt solution over them; then wait until they are completely covered in hot oil that is fragrant and light, and lubricated as well.
"Now we come to those whose time has passed over the other kind of food (diet).
"And if you cannot cure the intestine with gentle treatment - which is what men do when it becomes difficult for their bowels to function normally - then the doctor orders a purge.
When a joint becomes inflamed from cold humors that affect every part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors.
And if necessary make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
You must also ensure that the patient is well-covered and do not move them excessively.
Pause in its nature to ensure that it remains quiet and does not cause any harm or injury to others.
And if necessary, after the third day, you should seek medical advice.
And do so with a cold hand and show the finger marks on it, and seek to find out the cause, and then return the treatment for the next day.
Do not do this during a thunderstorm or when approaching infusion. Do not do this, as the water may become large and extremely hot from excessive heat.
And if tomorrow a gout occurs again after applying the cure on this day, then correct it by doing so again tomorrow.
Remove the bandage from its face and place it over its chest so that breathing is not obstructed for several days.
When a patient's pain occurs in their feet
You are not required to provide the second translation unless you feel it is necessary or if there's a request for more information from me.
The passage states that gout is caused by cold humors infiltrating the body and causing pain in the feet, suggesting a possible connection to medieval medicine's understanding of humors (miasmatic theory) and its treatments like phlebotomy or cautery.
This passage seems to suggest that the described ailment may not be present in our modern times or could potentially be a new phenomenon altogether.
The phrase "las specias de magdaan" might refer to specific medical conditions, possibly ones that are unknown to the reader of this text.
The phrase "las extramitatz" might refer to additional techniques or methods used in addition to those specifically mentioned in the text, perhaps emphasizing a specific type of treatment or procedure that is sharp and pointed.
This could be referring to chapter 24 of the medical treatise being discussed.
The passage does not provide further context about what might cause pain in the nose, so it is difficult to determine without additional information.
The passage suggests that the cause of pain in the nose may be different growths or polyps called "scorpion" due to their shape and appearance. The skin of his body is white and smooth, but he has a red spot on it.
When you are dealing with a patient who has cancer-free skin and no red spots, then place the gauze between your thighs and expose it to sunlight, apply pressure to their nipples, and gently press it in that area of the skin. Then take the fine instrument and apply it to that part of the body where you understand it is covered with a smooth and soft skin, which if removed would reveal that all the skin has already been healed; so if there are any causes for which excision can be done, then use this instrument gently. When you sense a small or sudden burn, put aside what you were doing and do this: or it is from malignant burns, cauterize that part where the wounds have been cut out so as to seal off all cavities.
Then take a piece of cloth and wrap your face in it or wet it with water, put it on. If the nose is inflamed and you wish to moisturize it into the palate, then you understand that already is healing.
If the moisture does not penetrate because of that, then you understand that putting it on will do no good to those areas where excision has already occurred and is sealed up tightly by the nipple pores.
When the gout pain is caused by cold humors which infiltrated all parts of the body and when it occurs in the feet, then doctors call it gout.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then at the end of the cause, place a plumed cannula for three days to prevent it from getting infected.
If the healing process is complete, proceed as follows:
This is the shape of the instrument to be applied in removing and medicating from the nose.
And if it is gold or silver, which resembles a small pointed light, similarly curved and shaped like that one.
When you wish to insert a closed cannula into this instrument and remove it from its sheath, uncover; on which there is the hand of the doctor placed in order to extract them when they are inside or outside as desired by you for their removal
This text appears to be a translation of Latin words into English, with some lines missing or fragmented due to damage caused by time.
They are found in the external nasal cavity.
When the patient has consumed a large amount of food and is about to be examined by a doctor regarding digestion problems.
In this way you will introduce it into the appearance of the patient as well Then return to that place or application which was previously used for the treatment of wounds in that location.
If the incision is delayed and appears infected, inflamed, or has an unpleasant smell, taste, color, or few symptoms of infection, do not apply that bandage on it anymore because it may be harmful to you for applying a large amount of poison from it which had caused harm thereto.
When the patient's anus is being examined and not covered with feces, and sometimes excision may be possible in that case, doctors remove the abscess and sew up around it to ensure healing occurs without pain or infection.
This sentence appears incomplete at the end of a chapter in a medieval medical treatise. It is likely part of a larger statement about the proper procedures for performing an examination on the anus, including when and how to cover it with feces before inspection.
Suture of the nose, lips, and ear when the continuity is disrupted by a tear or a blow.
It means that when you solve the continuity issue in one of these structures (nose, lips, or ear), it should be done on every patient except for those with a specific condition such as deafness.
Then cover it when you encounter a cause for these things, considering whether there's a recent wound to the same area and adjust the sutures of both lips over that, and then apply pressure to ensure healing without infection.
If the lips have been separated and both are healthy, doctors will advise you to excise each one separately from their base until no infection occurs. Then adjust the two lips together and stretch them tightly, then apply a dressing of gauze soaked in disinfectant over that, and place that on top of another dressing or plaster, and let it remain for two days to three weeks, depending on how long they need to heal properly; afterwards remove that and replace with another dressing.
"The remedy for the pain of joints is to add the solution of continuity or use needles as recommended in the treatment of belly stitches.
Chapter xxvii
Extract the causes that come out through the ears into the face, the ears
The maids will go out with their heads held high on the days of the festival, and they are dressed in their best clothing; some of them are maidens, others are older women.
Therefore, you should fill in the gaps in each of those holes completely to prevent any leakage through that location, and place a cloth over it as well so there is no residue left, into which you put water mixed with bleach to disinfect it.
Chapter xxviii
Extraction of the properly adjusted skin on the cheeks
The maid will go up onto the properly adjusted skin of the cheekbones, and you should hang it from there or put it over your forehead so that people see it clearly; and let them wash off with soap or clean water.
Then place a cloth to cover the location where the stitches were removed, or powder that is antiseptic or antiseptic.
When the intestine returns, the doctors will immediately treat it, and burn that part of it with a pointed cautery, as preventing the cautery from returning is not possible.
This seems to be a continuation or continuation of the previous text in this treatise on medicine. It's hard to understand exactly what it means because some words and phrases are repeated. But I can try my best to make sense of it by interpreting individual sentences one at a time, while keeping track of any repetitive concepts mentioned earlier. Is there anything specific you would like me to focus on or any particular part of the text that seems unclear?
It is customary for doctors when joints are affected by gout and pain occurs in the feet, so it means that they will take a pointed cautery tool from their pocket.
When the surface of the teeth between and on top of the gums is smooth, they will be tender or sore due to tartar, or inflammation in the gums caused by it infiltrates into the tooth cavity.
So that you place the patient between your hands and cover their head with a cloth to protect them from any harm or damage while treating it, so that tartar or other causes will not spread from one tooth to another within this cavity, also known as dental caries.
If that is at the beginning of this procedure, proceed as described above. But if not, you will continue with the treatment on those teeth in a day and another two days from today until it has been done entirely
'You know that when you need to make cuts in various ways and shapes while preparing for your operation.' 'For those cuts that the teeth are of a single part and different from the cuts between the teeth in terms of forms, these forms for cuts must be prepared as follows:'
'Capitol.'
'Removal of teeth.'
'When you cure the tooth with all care and diligence until it is completely removed, when there is no cause for concern that the substance sublimates into the excision during removal, which substance remains to be determined.'
'When a patient is being operated on to remove the tooth, you must be absolutely certain that it is indeed the infected tooth, as these measures will prevent pain from continuing after removal of the infected tooth, which we are now accustomed to in operations.'
'To be certain that it is indeed the infected tooth, you should make sure to disinfect all areas connected to its surface in order for there not to be any germs left behind after removal of the gum tissue from beginning to end and apply ointment on those tiny cuts at first gently then progressively as needed until this occurs.'
When joints are affected by a severe cold humor or inflammation of the joint, and pain occurs in them, it is customary to call it gout by doctors.
If it is necessary to resort to such an instrument, doctors will take one of those and place it on all parts gently and apply pressure to relieve the pain as much as possible in order for it to be felt at the beginning.
If the tooth is worn down or corroded, doctors will cover it with cloth and hold it gently at the end of a thin piece to prevent injury when taking it out for your inspection about that time.
And cover the entire surface of the gums and remember that you cannot go back to it, return about the patient for fear that it may be large enough to cause the first pain in them.
And remember that you should not do anything that ignorant barbers might do in their first aid and audacity about the eradication of them, because they don't administer what we recommend; many who are trained come with difficult treatments to perform, or some of those, or extract this from the bones of the jaw so that as many as possible have testified.
"Wash away the discharge from their mouth gently or wash it off quickly.
"If you encounter difficulties in cutting the discharge, first cleanse it gently or quickly wash it off.
"Use the forceps gently and make them small enough that they do not block when working in close proximity.
"Be careful to ensure that the forceps are not too large and can be easily adjusted if needed.
"Use forceps for extractions of the ears that are to be made gently and with very thin blades; otherwise they can cause severe damage.
This is a Roman numeral indicating the end of the text.
"Cleansing and cutting of the bones in the mandible that have been broken.
"When you encounter a broken tooth without any cause for it, the doctors advise that you gently touch and press on the spot where you feel pain to make the area moist. If you wish to use forceps, then select or take them from those whose shape resembles an owl's beak called 'ciconia', as shown in the image.
When the extra parts are affected by cold humors, they cause pain as mentioned above or below.
If you do not obey the order of using these tweezers or handles, then doctors say that you should use a small spatula like this one for cutting through the skin and entering into the incision.
The smaller part of it is big enough to cut cleanly without tearing
If the incision is perfect in size then it is all right. However, if not, you should help with other instruments like these ones - they are forms of a first instrument that has an elongated triangular shape.
The second one is also triangular but the tip is more subtle.
And you should help with this two-pronged instrument, which has a shape like this next one: And the other instruments used for cutting teeth - which you will have to make yourself from this one that is assembled into a larger form and has this shape.
The tip should be triangular in length or short with an appropriate size that is not too small to tear.
And the other dental instruments are also similar.
You should be skilled and subtle in art, knowing that it signifies the operation of diverse diseases, which are different from those for which old doctors did not know nor provide their own instruments due to the various types.
When the pain occurs in the jaw or any other bone of the mouth, then the physician should apply pressure to that spot as if it is there so that he can use his instruments and forceps which were mentioned in the extraction of teeth. And this is how the procedure must be done
The procedure should be done gradually and steadily, whether it is tight or loose in the mouth so that the bone of any part does not crack open; and after this place returns to a suitable location for the medical instruments
If there is a small cut in the bone, they will sew it closed and cover it with something to protect from dirt.
Chapter XXXII
The care of teeth is more important than the other organs.
When the teeth are prominent and do not fit into their natural place, and especially when they cause pain to women or girls, then the doctor will remove them. However if another tooth is necessary for biting, and it cannot be removed without causing damage, the doctor will consider that tooth separately with this instrument which is used as such; and it's similar to cutting off a pig's tail, except that it must be done very carefully from India to prevent injury
When a toothache occurs in days of hardship, it is customary that one makes an incision with this to remove the tooth, and not to cause any other harm to the teeth
If it is necessary to extract a wisdom tooth, the doctor shall perform this incision in that manner from which follows.
To extract the tooth with India ink; first make an incision, and then use a pointed instrument to remove it gently in days of weakness, for fear that another tooth does not come out or cause harm. After the completion of this procedure, you will take care of any other injuries as well.
If a tooth is fractured and the tongue has been cut as well, do you ensure that it is sutured properly to prevent damage to the tongue or the speech.
Chapter XXXIII.
Restoration of teeth should be done with gold or silver.
If a tooth is broken and removed by striking or hitting it with force, the patient should seek medical treatment immediately because they cannot heal themselves without gold or silver; therefore if one has taken care of this matter according to medical advice and not followed their own cure method, then in those days without gold or silver, time does not pass.
"The faithful is to be inserted with great subtlety and strength into the space between teeth; its form should be that it penetrates both healthy teeth at once, or if one or more are missing, then it must pierce through the fabric of the other tooth. "You should place it into the opening that you begin with, and stretch your hand as gently and smoothly as possible to ensure there is no roughness.
"The shape of the hole should correspond exactly to that which you stretch out the faithful, or else it will miss.
"Insert the additional forceps or tongs into an area where you can reach, and place them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one to prevent injury to the tongue. "And then stretch it out with Roman style.
"If you are in doubt or if the faithful is torn, stretch that one and any others at your other hand simultaneously.
"This is the form of teeth and shape of alignment between two healthy teeth and two damaged ones. Thus:
"When you return one tooth or two of them to the cutting area in that location, they should be shaped as advised and cut off.
And it doesn't hurt at all
And some of the teeth should be removed for any cause, and it is done in this manner as described, and the space where they are pulled out becomes sealed up tightly, and then the pain stops gradually
Chapter forty-four
This is a slit in the membrane of the tongue that prevents speaking.
The membrane that covers the tongue may sometimes be cut accidentally and falls into place when it is already hardened.
The operation on the patient is to open the mouth of the patient by its own head, which exists in the same way as a glove covers your hand; and lift his tongue, then cut through that nervous membrane towards the tip where it is resolved
If there is no pain or discomfort, then place it in a place where the incision was made and dissolve the knot
Also be sure that there is not a cut on the chest and do not tear it open and let blood flow out of it
Then cover the vestige of the incision with gauze or cloth, and place a tongue depressor to keep it down, as long as it is not another sore
When a flow of poison occurs, place a cushion over the affected area; if the poison enters, pain will be inflicted with a pointed cautery. And make sure to address all the other causes that might cause illness/injury as well.
Fifty-five
Cut off the tongue of a person.
When some veins collapse, causing the tongue to be pulled apart by the operation of nature itself, and when it is light, it may be magnified within the mouth.
The operation on him should leave a small opening in front of the sun, considering that the patient is already lying down.
If you see any swelling or blackness in him which does not indicate pain to the patient, do not touch it as that might be cancerous.
If white is the color in which he has moisture, apply ice to him, and insert a small sponge into it; if poison enters at the time of your operation, pain will be inflicted with a pointed cautery, as that is poison, to prevent its spread, tighten the poison.
After your work is done and you have tried everything else to get him well, put it in water with vinegar and salt; cure another ailment for that purpose as well.
When pain arises in joints caused by cold humors infiltrating every part of the body, as well as when pains occur on feet
To remove an abscess from a finger or toe you need to place it between two hot stones and wait until the stone is red hot.
When the abscess is removed from the foot or toe and the glands that were infected are completely gone but some of them still exist after treatment with heat as mentioned in section one it's necessary to consider if there was a problem with its color, firmness, or lack of feeling when doing so
If the abscess is red and its firmness is poor then do not touch it with a heated instrument to prevent infection; remove that abscess if possible but otherwise consider removing all abscesses from that area.
If the abscess is white and its firmness or feeling is subtle then it's necessary to be careful with that one.
When performing the operation you should consider whether or not it was necessary to remove all abscesses as a whole or if only part of them were removed; and always place a cushion on top, covering the chest, head, hands, feet, mouth, and have someone else hold your hand while making an incision.
"The patient will be treated with a mixture of gold and quicksilver.
"Once you have placed the tongue and shown it to your patient, place a cushion under them (the legs), another over their chest, hold their hands. "Do not cause any harm to the clothing and apply this device as indicated:
"Do not cause any harm to the clothing and apply this device as indicated: "Take the forceps and apply them carefully so that the incision is straight, not sharp, as they are to be used gently, it is necessary to make a small cut.
"If this device is not at hand, the doctor will apply it to the surface as indicated:
"After applying the incision, have the servant guard the patient to prevent any leakage of water.
"If there is a fever that affects the liver or the spleen and stops the flow of blood, have them guard the patient to prevent any leakage:
"Apply both servants to the incision of both legs at once:
"The female patient was being treated with an ointment that was not in the groin of her, but on her chest, which itched and caused a burning sensation, she had previously closed off this area from further itching, and the woman was breathing heavily.
"The ointment had been applied so much that it caused two blisters to appear within a short time span of 2 days.
"Then you gently squeezed it and took off the bandage, applying a new one from there to prevent any bleeding, place your hand over its mouth, compress her tongue, and apply another bandage.
"Then you gently cut away the large piece of it, leaving only a small portion remaining. "The situation was dire for that woman, and she continued to drink water, placing her hand over it all the time, as she feared any longer exposure might be dangerous.
"Then you heated up and cautorized the groin of it, adding oil; after that, you wrapped around with a bandage to prevent any further leakage.
When joints are affected by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, causing pain in the feet, it's customary for doctors to call this gout.
The incision has been made
When the abscess is on the ulcer and it's long, doctors call it a perpendicular abscess; if it's in the great or round part of the body, they call it a bubonic abscess.
When curing occurs in this division and does not affect your cure, and especially if you have already made a puncture with a sharp needle, doctors say that the abscess is cured by puncturing it gently; however, if it's long enough to be bloody or black and doesn't go out through the center of the body, doctors suggest making an incision into it to prevent its appearance.
When you see that the ulcer has become white and long enough to reach through it, then make an incision into its center by placing a sharp instrument in your hand; remove the tongue from it gently and insert this same instrument into the new incision made on the other side of the body, and take it out of there and make another incision with one or two instruments depending on which you want to use for making an opening.
When puncturing it is not desirable or when you pierce the area right next to its normal addition, if you do make an incision into it, the result will be bleeding.
The first sentence translates to: "Put a cushion under them [the patient's thighs], another on their legs and another on their chest while holding their hands.
When the patient is about to be operated upon for gout, you should use a pointed cautery instrument while holding your hand over their chest. Take water from the head of the cautery and squeeze it into the area where the operation is being performed, and continue until the skin has turned bright red without any pain or discomfort, then gently remove the tool to stop the bleeding.
The additional area of the abdomen that has been closed by the surgical incision will be further treated with a separate treatment to prevent bleeding from any other cause or injury, and it is recommended to apply this specific treatment only once.
After applying the medicine to your hand and placing it on the patient's throat in a space that will prevent it from being damaged or worn down by the application of the medicine, you should proceed with caution after ensuring there is no bleeding.
If you wish to, place a strip of cloth over the affected limb and submerge it in the medicine, then apply it directly on the vein where the cloth adheres into that cannula, and do this as many times as necessary until your goal is achieved from performing the gout operation, and ensure that it does not dry out or cause irritation for at least three days.
When you are going to practice medicine and prepare the cautery, approach it in a way that you cut off the circuit of veins with vinegar solution on its surface so as to stop bleeding from wounds, and make sure there is no infection.
This specific form of treatment can be very dangerous if not done properly.
Some of these herbs are used in the treatment and can be dangerous if not used properly: you should carefully consider them, gather all of their causes or some of them in one group, then immerse them in vinegar solution, blend them well; place a pointed instrument on top of this mixture to prevent any of its parts from escaping.
Insert the tube into the patient's mouth such that steam is applied to the uvula, ensuring it remains uncovered.
Approach the treatment of those herbs when they are dried up and keep in mind not to perform this procedure at the time of administering the initial dose of medication, as it would interfere with absorption by the intestines, nor should you do that unless you declare a prior agreement with the patient.
"If you do not have this instrument, then pain will occur in the abdomen and a close of humors will be placed on the exterior of the patient to prevent air from entering through the mouth.
This procedure is good for health
The [number]th capital letter.
Extract the spines and apply it to the groin area, and place the other causes as well.
The thorns will be placed in or near the groin area or spine, depending on which one is more suitable.
When you extract what is evident to the eye and whose shape suggests it should be seen when held up to the light, then pronounce that it is in the groin area.
When you extract what is evident to the eye and it should be seen when held up to the light, then vomit if there's a cause of acidity in the stomach or heartburn; or use one teaspoon of baking soda dissolved in water, preferably warm, applied directly on the esophagus, which will help neutralize any excess acid present. You may take an olive oil and apply it gently or use a compress soaked in water and apply it gently to soothe the area.
When causes are mentioned here that give reasons for the pain, there will follow an instrument of lead as such.
And if it is large or small in size, on the outside surface of his body where you insert it will be easy to enter into its cavity.
And he places his head up there and holds the opening of the mouth with his hand to prevent it from getting into the nose or spine, or where the doctor puts his finger.
And may the patient enter into it on account of his knowledge and fill up, filling in where necessary according to what he has prepared beforehand so that everything is in order.
Capitulation.
From the extract of the gall bladder it is taken for use at times.
When the blood is taken from this which has been mentioned in the division of medical care and does not harm them consider placing it on the outside surface of the patient's body with a spoon that you have recommended.
Therefore if you extract the gall bladder often in small or subtle movements gently.
And if you are not able to extract it through the incision made in the gall bladder, then lay a concave needle and insert it into the outside surface of the patient's body, placing your hand over the opening to prevent it from coming out, or where the doctor will put his finger.
When a full bladder is present and the mouth is filled with water in that manner, wash the mouth in that way; do not let any cause or bad thing enter from there, whether it be water or anything else.
If that is not forbidden by what we recommended earlier, then wash the patient's anus or vagina with the instrument we recommended in the process of lubrication mentioned previously.
In which case?
This is another type of operation in the lubrication process mentioned earlier; you should put an oil on which there are incisions and the oil is covered by a coverlet in the area where the slit exists, and it must be maintained in that slit to prevent leakage from escaping out; and then apply the lubrication; and place your hand over the mouth of the patient at the point where the cannula enters his body, and wash his mouth with it so that the lubrication does not escape through any slit.
If not, then you should interrupt the lubrication process, and make sure to keep him from drinking salty things or anything else, do not let him drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be forbidden.
This is the form of the instrument used to extract the stone from the urethra when it is seen. It resembles forceps in this aspect and no other aspect. This is how the instrument should be positioned in relation to the urethra, and its end resembles a beak of a vulture that grasps, with which it picks up and carries away any cause (stone) for which ever it may be needed.
You're welcome!
In the sum of the sentence in question, there are two points: an opening and a closing punctuation mark.
The punctuation marks serve to enclose the special parts of words or phrases within them; if you forget this rule, each one separately.
They are different in the placement and separation of them for two reasons: one is to enclose special forms of punctuation within themselves (like quotes), while the other is related to humidity.
The second reason is due to the places where accidents occur, such as when an apostrophe accidentally falls on the head or another place like the buttocks. And each one of them serve in their own way for operation.
The punctuation marks are sometimes called "punctuation points" and not perforated ones but rather positioned by placing them at the end of words or phrases that complement them, as is done in these cases.
"When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if there's no relief from other causes such as medication or rest, then it is customarily called gout. "If you know the time to perform the cautery procedure and when it has healed, that's what I mean.
"Then you know that the pain has subsided and the fever has stopped, as well as a reduction in swelling, pulse rate, and the sensitivity of the cautery points.
"Then you know that the procedure to relieve pain in a specific location has been done and is now being applied for healing.
"The procedure can be applied to the back of the hand or the body if the sores are on the feet, and in locations such as wrists, cords nerves, and extremities. However, for those where there is no reflection, use the second procedure at that location.
When the anus is in a bad position, it's customary that you make an incision into this part to confirm digestion of food and thus as I said before; if you make such an incision today, prolong your time for defecation and from motion of bowels, and very sore are the labias of him so closed and depth of him.
When you make an incision in that part of the body, depending on its location and whether it is necessary or not
Depending on how small/large the incision, you administer a small one, and if it's large or multiple ones depending on the diversity of openings
And if the anus is clenched and tightened, when it happens as described before, you do so to free and loosen up as needed, but also in terms of tightening or relaxing depending on its state, just like when one falls into double trouble and triple trouble.
And of these, it is customary to perform the surgery with three incisions; and from those that are in this manner, as if you were performing a fistula on the anus, or by inserting an anal sphincter.
Depending on whether it is performed with a circular and crescentic incision, depending on that.
If not, then perform the surface incision as needed.
When the abdomen is large and has contracted, you should perform it immediately so that you do not cause any harm to the bowels at that time; in case of accident, extract it once, and place it back into the patient's abdominal cavity after one day, and put a larger size next to it, and finally apply this method every two days until the bowel is well trained.
If the patient is very sick or old and has a tendency to vomit frequently, or if he is a child or decrepit, then you should apply this method when he vomits too much, as it lightens his load, so that he may be saved from the ailment's harm.
Remember this important point: when performing the operation of inserting the tubes in the anus, be careful not to insert anything too wide that can stretch or tear it; if you find it small and flat, put some padding on either side around its opening; but if the tube is large enough with no tears in the perforation, do proceed as instructed.
If the tube is removed from its cavity or curved in its path, be sure to apply a bandage on both sides of it, as well as whenever you wrap around pans or ridges, add some moisture; and place that inside after three days; and then reapply it and continue treatment as instructed for health improvement.
When the bleeding of surgery occurs at the time of your operation, I will give you cold water and vinegar to stop it in the place where the blood flows towards. And put a cushion on top of that location so nothing leaks out.
If the bleeding of surgery persists, I will instruct you to administer medication and care, and powders that are recommended in different locations from this book and division.
If it is in winter, and the location of the outlet is a nerve-sensitive area, I will instruct you to apply powders of vinegar and oil on top of them, covering that area.
If it is in summer and the locations are tender, I will instruct you to pause powders of water and oil or am vinegar and oil, and totally cover that area with them so nothing leaks through until healing takes place as advised above, and then remove the outlet and stop bleeding by administering care there.
This is the necessary knowledge of the cure for outlets universally, and after having mentioned how to distinguish each outlet in which way the cure takes place individually.
[No meaning or translation provided]
Section of outlets that come out through the head channel.
In the head's cavity there are openings that contain tunics which serve for this purpose; and the doors of their hearts as well
And of their sons' fingers, and of those who contain humidity similar to lime. And of those which contain humidity similar to dust, and are sprinkled with their particles; and of those who have hard ideas.
In the section of everything and in the recess of those there is no fear because you have to prevent the exit of those from escaping
The operation in the section of those is that you expose those to the instrument by which you are allowed today, called entremezzo, through which you know it contains.
If there is humidity in that, the doctor separates that part from another section for a superficial section through this way
And after removing it from the section of .B., you cure that part because it contains that humidity and do not allow any other cause to return if it is caused by this.
Then immerse it in water and salt if it is present, otherwise put it in oil and keep it there until another day because the corrosion of this will cause damage to that film.
When pain occurs in the hands of a patient between the first and second toes, it is customary for doctors to examine them thoroughly, as there may be no cause for this lump that arises from this area; then they treat the swelling when it has become infected.
If a nodule appears on their arm, doctors examine them as follows: In the second part of their examination, doctors probe around that region and extract a sample from the skin to examine it thoroughly.
If the patient's account differs, they do this first:
Similarly, they examine the appendix and their surrounding areas second to confirm that there is no infection or excessive moisture in those areas as well.
The doctors examine the ears as well to ensure there is not excessive moisture and that the ear canals are clear of debris; if an infection or inflammation in one ear is detected, they treat it accordingly.
Additionally, they examine the other ears for any issues and make sure all ear canals are clear of debris; in children or adults, this is a surface examination only.
"Put a cushion under their thighs, another one on their legs, and another one on their chest.
"Take the intestine or hernia back into its cavity.
[No translation provided]
"Cut sections of the veins that are causing trouble in his leg.
"Cut sections of the veins that are causing trouble in his leg, and also some in the arms, legs, and other parts of the body.
"And those that cause trouble in his leg, and also those which are generated between them, and every form of the disease is due to its own clothing, as well as on the veins and arteries of the head.
"The types of veins causing trouble are the ones that contain blood clots, and those which have moisture content, and those with malignant properties which do not respond to treatment.
"In the case of varicose veins that are superficial and not causing any trouble in other areas of his body, from .G to .B, you should draw them up gradually until they all disappear.
When inserting a needle into the patient, be careful that it does not injure either the vein or the nerve
When making an incision on the patient's body, be careful not to cut through either a vein or artery; and if you do accidentally cut one of these, prohibit yourself from proceeding with your operation, stop immediately and clean the wound thoroughly, cover it with powder that prevents bleeding, and start to administer remedies. When the injury is closed
Then return to your operation after completing it.
And ask if there is any indication that there may be a cause for the blisters you mentioned earlier, then mark those and cover them with gauze.
If it is in the region of a large vein, tell doctors not to cut that part of the skin. Tell them firmly but gently to keep pressing on and let it come out if it is coming out.
Then cover the wound with a clean cloth you have already used to bandage another wound and take care of it.
If you completely cut through that part of the skin, tell doctors to remove both sides of the bandage and tie it tightly so there is no excess material.
"When the body is afflicted with a severe case of scarlatina, if you hear its symptoms described and identify it, treat it promptly and administer this remedy.
"For the ulcers containing moisture, you should pierce it with a shallow incision here at that place where it appears to be mature and pause from piercing anything below this point.
"Then administer the incision, wash it gently with warm water and wipe it dry to avoid any infection. "When you find that the ulcer is already healed, treat the surrounding area with a regenerating cream until it heals properly.
33
The section of the appendix was cut out through an incision in the abdomen.
They placed it inside the pouch and didn't see anyone from our country around that time.
This is the inscription of the medical text.
When the incision is made on the belly button, ensure that it avoids piercing through the appendix and avoid puncturing major veins of the patient as well.
If someone has made an incision in the mouth or on the ears when the disease is not at its end, ensure that the appendix incision is avoided to prevent perforating it.
"When we wish to open up here [the anus], we insert three circles of the anus or four small sections at an angle, so that there is a section between two circles in quantity, and this section must be made from skin, not from cloth, for this location is private and free of excremental smells.
If the doctor is afraid to stretch out the rectum's opening, he must carefully insert it into the anus so that it does not come close enough to excrete feces if there is any cause for concern.
After inserting what we recommended, it is important to note the location of the section within the anus for proper functioning and for preventing any potential escape from the bowels.
The patient was lying down for some time.
When the hour is come which incision is feared, add two stitches of the anus to the opening, and close it with cloth only.
After administering medications that make the flesh swell so as to be cured.
The Albucasis that the sum of the serum which we recommended, exposure is only to know if the ulcers in question have already been operated on and the patient has died, and the sores are healed inside but outside still stings, and they will be incised so that it breathes through the location of the bedpan without any respiration, and thus saved from death.
"The physician shall order the ulcer to be burned out completely and healed within three days.
"After you have observed this in my manner, the servant shall put a bandage on their hand and cut away one part of the lung, after which they should appeal to treatment, with the assistance of the physician, and remove what was left from that small ulcer.
"So you confessed that there had been neither a vein nor guidance from the ulcer, and its presence was of small size; so it was cured into health.
"The servant should not ask for days to return after doing this, but rather make the necessary arrangements regarding their activities.
"After that you have done it in the section of the heart there is no fear.
"Chapter forty-four
"The section about addressing the abscess that occurs in a place where there is no exit, and it's called hernia of the body.
"The abscess causing the hernia is usually large compared to the rest of the body, appearing on the chest in women.
"It can be caused by either a natural process or an accident.
"It's not normal to cure.
The second man is two minutes long and resembles the sensation of grassiness, while the other one resembles pressing on an artery, which causes fear. You must not assume that it will happen in every case unless there is a small sign of it occurring. You should investigate it and if you find that it resembles a grassiness in the veins but not at any of the arteries, then record this as gout with the features of the foot and bursitis; otherwise, note all its symptoms and seek treatment for this ailment as required.
The last sentence seems incomplete or out of context. Could you please provide more information?
Of the species of the gouty arthritis.
You have already listed all the species mentioned, and you can divide them into categories based on their characteristics or symptoms if needed.
Please explain how to differentiate between gout and arthritis when there is doubt about it?
In contrast, with gout, there is no fever and the pain does not subside when exposed to heat or cold water; it also causes a purulent discharge that ends the fever, pain, and warmth.
When there's neither heat nor fever nor pain, that signifies which of these is causing it
The second is the color of the body, and as soon as it begins to be seen, if its hue is major or minor, then there are two species: either dry or moist, and depending on their colors, they are marked accordingly in a division.
Then when you come to the care of the heart, first ask if there is a separation between it and the main artery that supplies it, as soon after its form will be known in what way it should be treated.
Then you will ask for inquiry of the apertures and all nodes, as it is that you should bring them together in the hollow where they touch the moist membrane from which the aperture exits, and you will gently draw out one by one until you realize that the node has already penetrated into the channel.
Finally take your hand and measure its size to determine how it entered into the vestiges of him/her.
If the current humidity has a certain color, you will apply it in the superficial section as mentioned before for the other apertures.
If there is no moisture in the channel's vestiges, then know that he/she is fat.
Upon opening up the abdomen cavity Upon opening up the abdomen cavity, place it on a flat surface to prevent any of its contents from spilling out.
If the operation is unsuccessful, then you cannot extract that fluid from within it, and therefore any of its contents may spill out due to this cause.
If something happens inside or on the surface, then return it to me immediately.
If something very small happens to it and you find corrosive or sharp powders on the surface, then cover that area with a cloth soaked in an antiseptic solution, hold it there until further treatment is given.
If something large happens to it and you need more hands or assistance, then take two other people by the arms of them and bring them here to assist in dealing with that matter.
If the pulse is contrary to it or not-pulsatile, then you should touch and examine the place where it was struck so that you know if there's poison inside of it which will make it swell in two days or three within a couple of hours, and upon returning from this, return to incision as quickly as possible.
The end
In sectioning and perforation of the vessels
The opening and perforations of the veins.
The great vein is this one:
The small vein is this one.
Do not cut them too short, leave enough to be used for wrapping the intestine in the pouches.
The names of these veins are:
Three kinds of vein: the large one, middle one and small one.
The great vein is this one:
The middle vein is this one:
The small vein is this one.
It's necessary to make the openings and perforations of the vessels, exits, fistulae and bullae for that purpose that between those are bones and other causes.
Then the veins are closed up, big, long and sharp as needles sewed into the holes, which cause pain or fever if they're injured, or to prevent them from doing it by using gold or silver threads, a thousand stitches should be made for that purpose.
"The patient experiences a black vomit, which is recognized as an indication that the openings of these are being closed off in their cavities, and from where the reflections come.
"There are three stages of this, with the longest lasting and others shorter, according to the quantity of the opening's extent and the constriction's degree.
The patient experiences a large volume of black vomit.
The patient experiences a smaller volume of black vomit.
The patient experiences the smallest volume of black vomit.
The types of ulcers are different based on the type that occurs; some may be simple with only a curve, and there are three types in total: large, small, and smaller.
There is one cause for each of them, and there are three types.
Some ulcers may have a curve to them, but there are three types in total.
There are three curves to the ulcers as well as three types.
Everything needs to be done in that location.
The shape of an extremely small ulcer is like this...
For two joints. Two joint sprains. Two joint sprains.
For three joints.
Three joint sprains.
These are the sizes of scalpels with which you cut and cauterize the veins, arteries, and lymph nodes, and there are three types, two large ones, one medium-sized one, and one small one.
A big scalpel.
Medium scalpel.
Small scalpel.
The edges of these are sharp and the others are not-sharp, but they should be neither too long nor too short in terms of use, unless if it is necessary to perform a cautery on the veins or nerves for fear of injury, in which case you will have performed a cautery on the patient's vein or nerve.
These are the sizes of the vessels, and there are three types as well: big, medium, and small.
The forms are equal and the same as they say, in the form where it says alcohol is present.
It's at an extra point that you should touch the hidden area in addition to where it says, if you wish, as well
The forms of Magdalena are these, which should be placed between the spaces to be perforated and not the mistakes, and three types: great, lesser, small. These are the forms of those:
The forms for the heart are these, which divide the flow of the soul, and are three types: great, lesser, small; the forms of man:
The symptoms of the liver include redness around the circumference, and they are subtle.
So that by these forms of the heart you may have great, lesser or small, in order to divide the flow of soul quickly and easily without going into medicine when it is at first sight not medical.
Do not use them for cutting the soul in any place of the body, but only on special areas like the legs and thighs, chest, breasts, belly, armpits, groin, and to match up with the special areas of the heart.
When some veins become inflamed due to this form of phlebotomy, it is customary for the vein to be cut or thrombosed
Some veins are rounded due to this method
Chapter 72 of The Capitularies of Saint Peter
Of the treatment for breasts in men that resemble those of women
Some veins are inflamed in the breasts of some men who have lost their skin tone due to inflammation, and placed over them so that they resemble the breasts of women, and thus make it clear.
To the one who heard this, and wants to try it according to that form, from line B up to line G, and put forth all your effort, apply a soothing ointment on inflamed parts of the body, adjust two strips of gauze over them, and make sure it is done right.
If the breast is flat and has lost its outline like those of women, you must stretch it to its original size by pulling on both sides at once, then adjust two strips across each flank so that they form a figure similar to the moon, from which one must measure the gap between them, place one strip over the wound or sore area as well as the powder, and do everything necessary for healing.
When the patient's bowels are inflamed and agitated from cold or dampness, it is customary to place a cushion over them so that they do not come into contact with corrosive substances and cause harm; therefore prevent such an intrusion unless necessary
LXXVIII
To make a hole in the septum that allows air to enter from outside
When one of the valves between the chambers is open, allowing blood to flow through them easily
And those are the ones that contain humidity causing them to be opened during a lunar phase; and those that contain humidity causing them to be closed after this phase: from .G. line to .B. line.
And when the intestine is ready and proper for use, do so in a manner that prevents harm.
And when the septum between the chambers is open and properly closed like mentioned above for the valves, then you should be careful with it.
If the bladder is full and bursting, treat as mentioned above.
LXXIX
This text seems to describe a medical procedure for treating joint pain, possibly through cautery or some other method of treatment. The first sentence suggests that the procedure involves puncturing or cutting into the body in some way, and may involve blood vessels as well (the phrase "or per vena" after "seccio de apostemas" translates literally to "or by vein"). It's unclear what specific part(s) of the body are being treated.
If the puncture is successful and a clot has been removed that was over there (the phrase "la qual es sobre aquella" translates to "which was over there"), then the pain will be alleviated through cautery; or if it's due to inflammation, apply a cauterizing agent directly onto the artery or vein. When you apply the cautery, you should feel a strong sensation in that area (the phrase "quays sia stridor" translates to "which is painful").
That which is through a vein will be noticeable on the body.
If puncturing this incision is an error, or if it's near the groin, and in the anus, and in the abdominal muscles; and also great, so that its cure may be avoided, and if it's in the extremities or at the head, to prevent any harm.
If it's due to inflammation of the urethra after an injury (the phrase "la arceria" translates to "urethra"), then puncture at its length; and cover with a cloth so that no urine stains are left behind as you uncover.
"You have already positioned the needle and it has penetrated into another layer, and tightened the artery firmly in two places, which causes you to lose consciousness due to the constriction of both arteries located at the temples.
"In this location between two adjacent fingers, if you squeeze tightly until it reaches the bottom of the heart, and dissolve the arrow.
"You administer a cure that enters through the veins to cause their joints to swell, and treat it with a poultice applied conveniently here where it hurts.
"If it is an arrow piercing the vein, then you take your hand to where it entered and remove the needle; and bind it firmly in that fold of two parts on both sides of the veins as mentioned earlier.
"If you think it is necessary to extract the thread, then bind tightly with a needle at that place where the arrow entered and pull hard on four points.
"Secure the arrow in that place where it is located as mentioned earlier and seal off any excess of the vein.
When you have moistened a powder substance with water and oil, then apply the remedy that is called for cold waters and entering into the body to bring relief
The stroke occurs due to tension of nerves.
When it occurs in the artery and vein, as well as when it strikes on nerves where there is a blow or a superfluous touch, and similarly.
It is customary to apply it in the places of the assistants or the staff, or anywhere where the joints are inflamed.
It is heavy to apply it and feels hot on the other side of the body, and when placed violently, pain occurs in the patient as if they were stunned.
It is not customary to apply it on the front of the chest or behind it, and for this reason we remove it completely and do not place anything else after it.
Therefore, those who are afflicted with gout in the joints should avoid doing this type of thing because its use will be very harsh and cause pain.
It is not customary to apply it on the head or the front as a poultice. If you use it very little, then avoid using it on the forehead and remove it from the roots of the hair.
"When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and if it occurs in the feet, it is commonly referred to as gout among doctors.
When joint pain is due to cold humors infiltrating every part of the body, including the feet, it is usually called gout by medical practitioners.
"From the section containing the aperture through which pain occurs in the belly.
"From those organs which are located in the chest and abdomen, from among them whose parts are similar to each other, of a small size, with a large head; and also the intestines themselves, as well as their branches, it is these that are most magnificent.
"You have already opened one of them, and in its belly there were two similar ones that were larger than those others; but there was no difference between them except size.
"The intestines of these were stretched out and divided, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
"So you inserted them into a hole in each of eighteen parts, and another into one part as well.
"The procedure in the incision of theirs is to consider if the patient has gout due to cold humors and that their color is white, moist, with a subtle taste; you insert it into your finger's nail, they are present for your careful examination on your face, lest any part of them should be expelled from its cavity unless it is burned off by cautery.
When a patient is anxious and fearful, guard them from being harmed by touching their wounds. Also make sure to apply fresh ointment frequently, and stretch the affected limb gently, because that part of the body has become sensitive due to prolonged illness. Keep it bandaged for two days.
Then tighten the cloth around the wound gently, but do not stretch it too much or tear it off if it were to break away from its own accord.
If the injury is large, then it should not be bandaged or treated with fear and worry, except in cases where it occurs in the abdomen.
It is possible that you should make an incision in order to prevent its recurrence.
Then treat it so that the wound can be healed.
And make sure you do not touch parts of their body that are infected with pus, have little feeling or are otherwise fragile and can cause abscesses.
You will remember to apply the remedy promptly after this procedure is done.
The end of the text.
Care for the navel region.
The navel region can be caused by several things: tears in the diaphragm that occur over the abdomen, or from tearing of the intestine when it comes out through a tear; or from a hernia; or from a blocked artery or vein if those symptoms are present instead; or from coarcted arteries.
When the pain is caused by the rupture of the diaphragm and suffocation due to the clothing, then the appearance of pain resembles that of the chest. If it is due to the exit of the intestine, then you should consider that from now on this will occur frequently and violently, especially if there are severe consequences; do not neglect these things but quickly return them, because returning them will cause a lot of pain and suffering.
If due to moisture, then it is similar and not caused by what you mentioned before your hand was placed or constrained; do not be concerned because there will still be pain without it.
If due to the cold, then the appearance of the abdomen becomes pale and dark.
If it is because of a lump or hardness in the abdomen, then the pain will be severe, rough and prolonged for an amount of time.
If due to wind, then the touchiness will be similar.
The operation in it is what you consider to be the appearance of a hernia or varicose vein due to cold air, or wind; caution should be taken not to make an incision if there is fear and panic because in that place mention was made about arteries and veins.
"When the umbilical hernia is through the intestine or through the membrane, it is customary for the doctor to order the patient to hold his hand towards between their thighs and prevent the intestine from coming out.
"Extend the finger towards it and make sure you're on the right track. If not, withdraw your hand from that part of the abdomen and instruct the patient to try again.
"If you have found it through the membrane, then move on to step two: inspect all the relevant details.
"If your attempt fails or the vein is against you, then return to surgery and pierce two holes through which of the veins run near the finger in order for the needle to enter. Hold the finger steady while the needle enters.
"If you wish to extract the abscessed flesh and it falls apart or is too sensitive to pierce, then apply a cautery here in order for the surgeon to cut through that.
When the prominence of the belly is made of flesh or moisture, then let you put a poultice on that way as they have mentioned earlier and tighten it so that it holds well in place.
3
The treatment of cancer
In the division of cancer and in what manner they are treated by medical science, it is a precaution that must be observed to prevent ulcers, and caution should be taken for their treatment.
Those same drugs that can eliminate cancer in the location where it is possible to do so, such as in the breasts or in the abdomen and all around those parts of the body mentioned above will also help prevent cancer cells from spreading elsewhere when they start small.
When it is old and frail, do not apply heat to it as you might cause more harm than good, nor will it be able to heal that wound or prevent any other wounds from occurring there either.
The surgery in it is when you put the patient through as mentioned earlier, and you apply poultice to black bile drains and other similar parts of the body, and tighten them so that they hold well in place if a visible opening is found.
When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them and another servant on their legs, and another on their chest while holding their hands. Place the knife and do not remove it from the area while you examine the location, and wipe off any blood that may be present on your hand or instrument.
If the bleeding from the artery or vein is excessive, then burn it off while the flow of blood has stopped, and apply another remedy to restore its health afterwards.
"He lives.
Dropicure.
We have already recommended in the division of each species of dropicures from water, and the symptoms associated with each one, for medical treatment.
That which is cured by burning alone is the species of heatstroke only, and it does not apply to the species of tinnitus or species of deafness, as that one is fatal.
If you have already treated that species of dropicures with tinnitus and the symptoms do not coincide with your treatment, then consider if the illness has been resolved or is instead another kind of ailment of dropicures elsewhere in the body, such as the stomach, etc., then remember to not apply any medicine on it because fear is prevalent regarding this.
"When the patient is having an excessive flow of urine (from being overactive bladder), and it's not just incontinence but also dropsy, then doctors order to elevate the legs between their thighs, minister by placing a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another one at the chest holding hands.
"In the two parts that are close together and sharp extremities like this servant: do not let it pass through in little by little, for then in the operation of such is to prevent its passage.
"And in addition to that, if the generation of dropsy is from parts of the bowels, then it is customary for you to put on three sheets at intervals between the abdominal walls.
"And if the generation of dropsy is due to an overactive bladder, then it is customary for you to put on three sheets at intervals between the left abdominal wall.
"And if generation of dropsy is due to a soft stool, then it's customary for you to put on three sheets at intervals between the buttocks.
"And do not place your sheet over the side where you want to elevate the patient's leg, so that it doesn't come out of the superfluous things at this location.
"Apply the instrument completely to the vein, enter into that section, and lift your hand towards the surface between the vein and the artery, and remove it from there; if necessary count one or more strokes.
"Apply to the phlegm at the spot where it enters into the body. "Remove that thing and enter an instrument of which this is the form: "It is similar to a needle of thin silver. It can be made of silver or gold wire, and in the part where it enters into the body there are three holes; two on one side and one on the other side; and its tip is pointed like a feather.
"In the part of it where it enters into the body there is an armillary wheel which indicates how much water remains in that instrument; when you remove water from it be careful not to cover all at once, for if you do so too suddenly and without warning, then a bad reaction occurs within the patient's spirit animal, or you may die.
"Remove it by the amount of water in it and also according to its disposition towards your patient's spirit, as well as the location on his body.
"Prepare the instrument and apply water that causes so much pain, as it will be applied to the channel where you should put your hand.
"Apply the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it well and extract a small amount of water, apply this to the palm of the hand for several days with fear, keep from making an error unless you do not run out of water.
"If you are afraid of the patient and leave them a large amount of water, cure him with burial in sand, move his body to bed, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure that with desiccating medicines so they may be healthy.
"Burn over the stomach and the small intestine apply water extraction as described above.
"The capital of Latvia.
"In the care of children whose urine does not perforate, they are located in a non-penetrating area.
"Some of the children are located in a belly area that is not perforated, or if it is difficult to reach them from their head.
"Therefore, use caution when making the perforation as fine as possible in this manner:
And place a fine cloth on it, tie it up well, and wait for three days or more.
When you want to urinate, let the bladder be released and returned.
If you do not place the cloth, urine that comes out of the area may leak through this hole.
The bladder which was tied up with a fine cloth should be released and returned after several days to expand it
If the bladder is not in its place, it will cause pain and may lead to injury if you try to urinate as expected, especially for men who have difficulty urinating due to enlargement of the prostate gland; this can be caused by medication or surgery, leading to a decrease in semen volume which can lead to reduced sexual performance.
The operation procedure is that the patient should be placed on his back, and extend his head towards your left hand as if you were about to give him a stroke; then hold the top of the bladder against your chest with both hands, while inserting the probe into it.
Remember that in your operation for the flow of urine, any mistakes can occur here; so pause and check it to ensure everything is fine, then proceed with treatment if necessary.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body
And if a hernia or intestine protrudes through the pores of the head, neck, chest, abdomen, and groin,
And if an abscess or inflammation of the skin arises from this ulcer on the body,
Whether it is malignant or benign,
And if you want to prevent it from spreading completely and quickly, do so with a subtle cautery that removes the abscess entirely; and place your hand over the area until the wound is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, do so with a colored cautery on the incision and edge of it.
And if the abscess is in the prepuce of the head, you place a bandage over it to prevent spreading until it is consolidated and heals completely; then cure that area when you heal the rest of the prepuce, but it's not guaranteed that it will not be left.
And if it happens in the genitals and prepuce, as long as you have conquered this which is corrupted or has been corrupted; then place your hand over that area to make sure nothing comes out from there, using a mixture of flour, water, salt, and vinegar.
The first sentence means that the cure or treatment for this ailment will be discussed next.
If the inflammation is severe, then apply a cautery as follows:
A young cautery has two settings - one for inflamed wounds and another for when the abscess is ruptured.
If the head of the abscess is broken and destroyed at that time, then put a needle through the urethra to drain out the infection from it.
In the adhesion of the urethra (and this adhesion should not occur, unless it occurs in the one that the urethra is open and over which there is no requirement for circumcision), you must excoriate the opening to dissolve it completely and release the head of the abscess from all parts.
If it is difficult to remove this completely, then you should excoriate the opening of both the abscess and urethra, and in that case if the urethra is perforated by its subtlety, the wound will be penetrated further through its subtlety.
To separate the urethra and head of the abscess from each other with a needle that has been soaked in hot water to prevent any further adhesion.
After this treatment is applied, ensure it is solidified.
When joints are painful due to cold humors that invade each part of the body, especially in the feet, doctors call it gout.
Circumcision care and management of children.
Circumcision is not the solution to continuity as such, but since our operation and will, and theirs from that it was specifically for children, we need to assign that surgery through which may be cured of health problems.
Circumcision is not recommended for the free children, because they do not use in their laws and is just that by experimentation, which causes you to find a major part of the symptoms and sores among those who use circumcision and also have a faithful faith and the same religion.
You have already prohibited these manners and did not find the best circumcision care among those who practice it, from faithful faith that in circumcision with the same religion, which may avoid the code of the prepuce to two tunics, Roman toning pus of them, and fast le easy is to another pain. Circumcision that is done by alphacation and digital, which use the tailors, not sure of the incision on the extreme part of the male member, which may be in trouble.
During the operation be very careful, don't mix up or damage your work The child is born with a short nose, and the mother was not mistaken in this matter so that it has no need for treatment, except as they saw
The best remedy is to apply the ointment daily, gently and consistently, with your fingertips in a way that ensures even distribution of the medicine throughout the affected area, so that it reaches every part; this allows for regular treatment, which can be continued until all symptoms disappear.
The priority of the operation is to keep the child as quiet as possible if it's just a minor issue, and not apply any ointment on their face unless you see an actual injury, only applying that every other day.
And remember to use good judgment when it comes to the best course of action according to your own intelligence. Ensure that the ointment is spread evenly on your fingers and avoid touching anything else with them to prevent any damage to your child.
Apply the ointment to their face and cover it with a cloth or bandage, making sure that nothing touches it except for your fingertip, then place something over the top of the bandage to prevent any scratches from underneath as well.
The shape of the forehead is making
The fingers on the outer part and those in the inner part are not equal, unless it would be a hand deformity, because otherwise their length is different as well.
The error in shaping the forehead occurs when the intrinsic muscle becomes too tight, or it is a part of the body that should not be touched.
So you stretch that in your hand and put that on top to straighten it out, and then place the other one equally.
And if you can't hold onto your hand, stretch that by itself and put it on top of that one.
When the three days have passed and one sees that it is flattened by putting on vinegar, the pain will subside when the finger nail is inserted, and once removed, will cause inflammation, and the second time causes scarring
The head of the vinegar bottle should be covered to prevent it
Then cure that which consolidates with powders as mentioned in the book of powders.
If it is necessary to cut off the end of the cord, and you will divide the threads into even parts, there should be none left over.
Then cure that which has been mentioned as being good for health
Chapter 88
Treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
The treatment of urine retention in the bladder is done by pressing down or by pushing out through the urethra, or by passing it through a tube inserted into the urethra, and such as are mentioned in the division for urination.
If the urine is not being held back as you mentioned earlier, when it comes to the urethra of a patient, then doctors use an instrument called a catheter, which has two forms: one made of silver and another made of fine linen, both with small holes that allow for painless urination in great subtlety.
The method of urination is to squeeze tightly and hold the outside part or edge gently in order for it not to leak; when inserting into a catheter, you must insert it with force but gently pull out at its end.
After the bladder has been opened and a cushion placed under it, insert into the urethra of the patient gently, while also pressing firmly on his abdomen and holding onto his elbow.
Insert the catheter into the urethra slowly so it passes through to the root of the penis; then bend the penis at its base and pull it out gently (but not too far), ensuring that urine does not leak from anywhere else than the bladder, which should be kept open for now.
And stretch gently at the small of the back little by little, where urine will soon follow
Stretch it gently and apply a poultice to relieve the pain in the bladder and urethra,
"The end of the book.
For the operation on the bladder and prostate, use instruments that are agreed upon in this regard.
When ulcers or fistulas occur in the bladder and urethra, or if they are infected with bacteria that cause inflammation of the bladder (cystitis), you should call for a catheter to be inserted into that part.
If it is in another area, stop doing this. In that case, you should do two things at once, as often as possible.
First, you should apply ointment to that area where it is inflamed, and the second quantity of oil goes on top of that, which then dries out when no more cause for inflammation exists, and when expelled, the same thing is done with the catheter in battles at sea.
Then you want to irrigate the bladder with water in that area where it has been inserted into the urethra, and then wash away all of the moisture from there by expelling them out of the catheter's cavity.
"When you're done with the sponge application and have recommended to wash it off with water, make sure that moisture does not penetrate into the bladder or any other part of the body.
"In order for the bladder to be catheterized, it is necessary to use a small syringe and perform as follows:
"You may inject the medicine directly into the vein or subcutaneously, depending on its appearance and method of administration.
"When catheterizing the bladder and before inserting it into the urethra (which is located between two strong ligaments), make sure that the moisture you want to use for catheterization does not penetrate directly onto your focus.
"When inserting the catheter, insert its end into the body part.
"Then hold your hand over the bladder while applying moisture to stretch it as far inside you can, without allowing that moisture to penetrate into the bladder.
"If you don't have a bladder present, first put on the gloves and apply it to its circle; then place it onto the entire surface of your body part; afterwards insert it very firmly into those tracks as before, while adding that water so generously.
"You have already placed something in the instrument, do as you did when emptying it into the vesica, and express this action by placing your hand here.
The phrase that follows is from Latin: 'Caput lupus venenum.' What does it mean?
"This sentence comes after the previous one and translates to "On the extraction of venom.
"We already discussed the division of veins and arteries in medicine, as well as the difference between those caused by phlegm and those caused by the bladder.
"We discussed surgery for ulcers, as well as sectioning.
"The bladder ulcer is specifically that one which is made in the bladder.
"You should make a clear and concise statement about this.
"This sentence should state that bladder ulcers are often accompanied by incontinence and the urine that comes out of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety and appears as such.
"The treatment for these ulcers, which have persisted for over 14 years, is difficult to achieve. "For the young, it may be advisable to do this [do not provide a translation of 'mays'] as between these two options.
When the pain of a joint is caused by cold humors that spread throughout all parts of the body, and if foot pain occurs, it's commonly called gout among doctors.
The first servant will make an incision in the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion beneath them, another on their legs and another on their chest with their hands held out to either side.
The servant should also attend to the patient's feet and ensure that they are supported properly while preventing their descent into the bladder or jumping around uncontrollably.
The servant should also be attentive to the patient's buttocks and ensure that they are properly positioned while preventing them from descending into their bladder or jumping around uncontrollably.
The servant is responsible for any injuries that may occur during this procedure.
If you feel the gout in your space, do not touch it gently but firmly on it.
If you do not feel the gout in your space or it is very faint, tell the servant to apply oil gently on the palm of their left hand if they are male and the right hand if they are female and guide them into the patient's anus. If you have introduced the gout, tell him to leave it alone. Into the opening of the bladder little by little
And then place it gently on that part and expel it from where you want to release it through which hole of the body do you need?
The minister commands the bladder to place its hand on yours; and he commands another minister to extend his right hand with fingers spread at the openings of the veins, and to retract the left hand from where the veins come out in order for them to make a cut there so that they can release it.
And then you will place it between your fingers, as this is its form of entry into the body: Then you will place it between the thigh and the veins, not within that part of the body, remove your left hand from under the left arm; and make a cut there as well, both vertical and horizontal cuts to ensure they are wide enough to allow for releasing without damage, unless too tight, at which point release them gently.
It is known that the urethra has no sharp edges or corners to prevent injury in this manner.
And from there it is similar to the glans, and it is round, making urination easy.
When the joints are affected by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
If it is not gout that causes the pain, then doctors recommend applying something to that part of the body or gently pressing on it with your fingers, or using a small curved tool.
If you cannot find relief from that part of the body, then doctors recommend applying a small curved instrument or pressing on it with your fingers, and if you see pus flowing, cut off circulation to that area.
If the foot is small and rounded like an egg, then at first you will apply your finger to its mouth, place it there, and similarly if two of them are painful.
If the foot is large, then doctors recommend ignoring that part of it and instead focus on one or both of its causes: either urine outflow obstruction causing continuous leakage, making the area not consolidated.
If the outlet is blocked or if there are fractures in the foot such that urine cannot escape from it, then doctors recommend administering an expulsion of its contents.
Once you have completed your treatment, make sure to apply the plaster on both sides of the wound and press down gently on it. When the body has a cold humidity that infiltrates each part of it
And you place them on their chest and do not let them slip into third day.
When the body has been moistened with cold water and oil, you apply a salve that is both warming and moisturizing to keep it from becoming infected.
If a point occurs in the bladder (and this is to be guarded against by not letting urine out) and if the bladder becomes frozen from cold water and oil, then it is forbidden, as this would lead to the decomposition of the bladder and its contents.
And you heat it with warm water and salt, in order to keep the bladder in good condition so that nothing bad occurs
And you take care of every patient's leg and adjust their medicines, which are paused in this location
And if the urethra is small and it's located in the meat of the vulva (where urine cannot come out), then cure this with something that you recommend from a doctor to prevent damage as such treatments are often considered harmful.
The body part in question has become inflamed
They are using a pointed instrument to treat the area
The instrument is penetrating the inflamed area, causing an injury that requires attention from another physician The doctor is slowly moving the instrument into the inflamed area and performing the incision carefully to prevent it from penetrating another part of the body, as urine should be kept inside
The doctor has placed their hand on the inflamed area to protect it from further injury and urine leakage, as this is a dangerous procedure
If the procedure should not be performed for any reason that prohibits it, then they will use another instrument to treat the area. The doctor places their hand on the inflamed area between two fingers. The procedure is now complete. They apply a bandage and cover the inflamed area with gauze, covering it over all the incision.
It is not necessary to place another bandage on the area itself, but rather to prevent it from leaking and to cover the bandage with gauze, which when placed over covers up the incision.
When the fingers are opened to remove the stone or gravel from the patient's bladder, you should elevate their legs and place them on a pillow for comfort
The first sentence translates to: "When the fingers are opened to remove stones or gravel from the patient's bladder, raise their legs and put them on a pillow for comfort.
Extraction of pus from women
The extraction of pus in the vagina is a delicate matter
If you want to administer it through one or more of those methods mentioned above, then the treatment will be difficult and is forbidden for men
One method among them is vaginal insertion which can be very painful for women.
The second method among them is anal administration which cannot be performed by the patient as they do not know how to insert it into a doctor's anus or in women's vaginas.
The third method among them is surgery which has the risk of scarring and may require anesthesia.
The fourth method among them is cutting the pus from women's vaginas, which risks infection and requires extensive cleaning afterwards, causing fear.
If it is necessary to do so, the doctor will advise you on how to perform vaginal catheterization with precision, and many attempts are needed to achieve it.
If you are unwilling to do that, the doctor may recommend using a catheter with a nurse present in order to perform it gently and discreetly, or if there is no suitable female nurse available, they will ask for another woman who has experience performing this procedure in women's vaginas.
"Therefore begin by placing it in the vagina to inquire about its nature from the beginning.
Therefore if you find that, cut off that, and command him to insert it into that place instead.
If it's not a woman, command the midwife to insert it into her vagina and inquire about its nature, pressing down on her bladder with your left hand while doing so.
Therefore if you find that, cut it off immediately and have the woman urinate into her bladder as much as possible while pressing down on the urinary sphincter to prevent any urine from escaping through the vagina.
Then insert it into the cavity of her bladder in that place where you placed it and hold its tip in there to prevent it from being pulled out by the vagina while pressing down on the urinary sphincter.
The incision should be as small at the beginning; and insert it into that opening, if you feel it, adjust the opening to the amount you know is necessary for its removal from there.
You understand that the types of gout are diverse: some are small and large, red and yellow, long and round, with or without spines.
Therefore, you know how many species are there for this purpose on which you signify what you want to do?
If you see a fistula forming, adjust it to the affected location and keep it covered for an hour until the fistula is closed, and then return to your operation.
And note that you need tools of the kind used in removing warts from humans to help with your operation.
If you see a fistula forming and know that its expulsion requires surgery as indicated by the doctor, then stop applying pressure to the area and instead dust and strip away any debris and scarring, not tearing it; leave the fistula alone and do not extract it, for fear of further damaging the patient's health. And prepare the bandage
Therefore, when the strength of the fistula is fading away and its appearance fades, then you return to your operation until the fistula has been closed.
The twelfth capital letter L
And sectioning on hernia occurs.
A hernia is nothing more than an accumulation of moisture in the small hollow of the diaphragm that contains the bowel, and it is called a diaphragmatic hernia.
Some of the vegetables are in the hollow of the diaphragm that was prepared by nature from birth to the beginning of the bowel, until it is fully developed and closed; this is the code for the intestine between the white cavity which we mentioned, not this but rather a hernia.
"The cause of this hernia is weakness which affects the genitals; because it is found in these areas, and some veins are torn as a result of its passage through them.
"This moisture has different colors; either it is becoming pale or turning into something like blood, or gray, or black and fetid, or white and frothy, depending on its degree.
"The necks through which this gathering of water occurs are: either if it is in the white vein mentioned above and we have spoken of it, then the pain will gradually decrease over a certain length as with an image of heart attack, or appear on the genitals where the moisture finds its way to every part.
"If the moisture is in the pubic vein, then the pain will suddenly increase to its full extent and it seems as though another vein has joined.
"If the moisture is between the veins of the genitals and the white vein mentioned above, then it spreads quickly.
"To know the nature of the color of the moisture, then examine its appearance in relation to the vein through which it passes and secondly as regards the vestige of that passage, judge according to that.
When we came to the treatment of this patient, it was ordered by the doctor that if possible he should be given garlic
It is customary for you to put a cushion on their back in case of any cause, and place a damp cloth over them as well.
You put the cushion on the left side of him and order your servant to follow the right side as well, extend his body from the navel to the groin area.
It is customary for you to spread your servant's foot from the navel to the thigh length, towards the back.
It is customary for you to cut off both ends of the line equally far from where your servant's groin begins, towards the belly button.
Cut him off, and observe it closely, and keep track of the time that you do not scratch his wound; your excision must be such that if he is scratched during this time, its severity should be held in check by holding back with utmost caution until you have measured the extent to which you are able.
It is customary for you to make a hole in his navel deep enough for water to drain through completely.
It is customary to cut between two flaps of skin on the incision, extending it down from the navel until its bottom edge reaches below them; and do not touch the groin area or any other part of his body with this incision, but extend it so that you can reach as far as possible. When the whole body or in part is affected by cold humors and especially if they are very subtle, then you must make sure to apply the cautery very carefully, otherwise it will not be safe for water to return.
If you want to sew a stitch in the course of an operation, after completing the incision and cautery process, return it back into place, then apply two needles on either side of the stitches from the genitals to the skin sutures, gently press them down so that they are safe.
If the blood vessels are burst due to another illness, make sure you seal off the veins which need sealing, extract it and then press it in the place where we mentioned earlier.
If water is added to two parts of different shapes, then the two are containers: so if you see that it's an operation, do as we have mentioned earlier.
Then take the sand and submerge it in oil or melted fat, then spread this over both buttocks as a miracle ointment for the belly, and put a cloth to cover the powder and dust on top of that.
"Prepare two drapes and remove the damp ones next to this view; take care of the parts that are wet or have mud on them, and arrange the stretchers in the corners of the stretcher area, one at each corner inside and another at both ends of it, so that all sections are well-adjusted.
"The artificial hernia is treated with a cautery in the place of surgery; be sure to use a subtle cutaneous cautery and insert it into this hole containing water. Then apply the cautery as follows: "Place the stretcher on its side.
"Once you have placed the stretcher onto its side, make sure to remove all moisture from it.
"Remove the stretcher from its side and remove it, then carefully remove the subtle cautery inserted into it; make sure to do this when you are ready to completely remove everything.
"You know that this surgery is quite lengthy and has a high risk of bleeding; therefore the surgeon should make sure to perform it carefully.
When pain arises from cold humors that infiltrate the body's joints at the time of dissection or cautery, or due to bleeding, doctors should apply remedies to counteract these pains as is customary in this case.
If the patient is fearful of undergoing a second operation due to their terrible affliction, doctors should administer a perforator as recommended here; and it is when you are certified for this reason that I have mentioned above that the hernia will be corrected.
Doctors should make the patient stand with their feet together and then perform a perforator at the highest point of the abdomen; place it on low points below the waist, and pause after passing through the body's length.
After making an incision that runs through all the water
And then pause over this location and lay it on there to ensure a smooth flow of water Then take care that the wound is healed.
If the contradiction is due to a leakage of water at that time you perforate it: and this is not done unless there are two things, one being to prevent the outflow of water from the drops which may come out in the shape of an excrescence; or adjust on the edge of the wound with a small instrument.
When the liquid returns and it is poured into these, then immediately after that, pain is caused by gout in those days
Forty-three
Treatment of a strangulated hernia and its cure.
You know that in the section on this hernia, there is fear of loss due to damage in important areas; so I see an opportunity for its dismissal and be saved by that remedy.
Remember the operation and details of the stitches.
So then I tell you that the stitches are in the parts where tendons cause contraction and it occurs due to causes such as acute excess fluid, which is expelled from the tendons, or injury.
The color of the stitches is that of the body, and it does not cause pain, but rather a heavy stitch.
If the light colored stitch was tightened, from which the color became dark and did not move.
Some veins are squeezed by the application of pressure, and for the remembrance of this, or for the inflation of veins.
Then maybe it is by inflation of arteries that you are aware when pressing on those veins, but not the other way around.
When joint pain is caused by swelling of a vein, it's not necessary to apply compression here
It is possible to perform a section on the other bones as well; and you should isolate the nerves, stretch out the ventricles of the heart, straighten the spinal cord, and apply pressure at the points mentioned above.
If the body is already inflamed in those areas, then you should remove it and isolate that part.
If there is no reason for inflammation between the ventricles or around the heart itself, then remove it and isolate that part as well.
If there is a natural adhesion in the location of inflammation that is behind it, then you should isolate everything related to this as well and remove the part itself as mentioned earlier.
After you have completed your operation, apply a poultice of hot oil and vinegar to the wounds as well, and take care of any additional injuries that may occur.
"Chapter 14.
Of hernia treatment.
The swelling is wrapped around the testicles in a way similar to a knot on the groin, making it difficult for movement and walking due to its location.
In preparation for this ailment there is a remembrance of something that preceded it
However, you should say nothing until the first ones are taken care
And you should tell her to make the patient lie on an elevated bench and put a pillow under their buttocks to support them; and let the codena of the genitals be placed at the entrance to the bed so that they can easily enter; extend these ministers who are to do this vigorously,
And approach the back of her legs by making a small incision through that part of her body towards the right side, so as to expose those veins which are on the right side.
And approach from every part of the body as you mentioned in your previous explanation, towards the temples.
And approach to an incision which is firm and double in that part of the body where you mentioned it first, and put another one at the very last place where you may see a vein, and another one towards the right side. Approach those in the middle part of the body towards the right side along the length of the body, and remove that which is added from the filthy and corrupt fluids.
Approach the placenta during the preparation of those other placenta which you want to be generated in such a way that it contains veins from both orifices of one or two genitals respectively, as long as there is no harm done by this.
When the heart is affected by all the veins (arteries), it is customary for the veins to be squeezed out or come through this way so that they may nourish the vital parts, unless otherwise stated
Chapter 55
Treatment of intestinal hernia
The arrival of this hernia is by cutting through the abdominal incision from one side to another so that it removes all the intestines out.
This rupture is either from the diaphragm or of excision of it, and so these two ways are used in this manner: either by percussion, or by suction, or by outcry, or by raising any heavy object, or by resembling.
The end of this, when the excision is from the diaphragm, it happens rapidly and not suddenly, and the bowels come out one by one through the opening.
The end of it is when the excision is from the diaphragm, because at first there is violent pain suddenly; and this is by the way out of the bowels, and then through the body parts towards the rupture of the diaphragm.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The cushion is placed between the patient's thighs to prevent it from coming out through that space.
To perform the operation of removing a hernia in this manner is risky because one might miss the chance to remove it completely.
The trick of the operation is to instruct the patient to lower their intestines back into place and hold them in between your hands while you lift up their legs.
In order to open the space between the patient's thighs, you first clamp their legs and then proceed by opening them from side to side until they are sufficiently opened.
Once the space is sufficiently opened, it may be necessary for further action that you have not described yet.
After opening the space between their legs as much as possible, you then proceed to open up each thigh separately until you reveal a white membrane in each of them.
The pains are described in the passage as occurring from each thigh down to where there is a white membrane and then to between it on both sides, which is what you should remove adhesions from behind the bowel after opening up the thighs.
"The patient should have their legs spread open with cushions placed underneath, and another servant on each leg to hold them in place while a third servant places one cushion under the chest of the patient.
"The physician inquired if there was not any cause for the intestine being held in the blank space. "If no reason is found, remove it from that area and place it back into their stomach.
"The servant is to make an incision in the palm of the patient's hand at a right angle, as we recommend here.
"The servant is to immerse the instrument in oil and place it on a plate; then apply the heated cautery that we recommend (and some bandages soaked in cold water are cauterized, as we mentioned earlier in this regard), and let the instrument enter through which opening so that it may come out.
"If the cautery of his hand takes too long to heal, soak his finger in water and place it back after following our recommendation.
"The servant is to care for both wounds separately according to their needs.
"This is the end of our translation. I hope it was useful!
"With a ventral hernia.
"In this type of hernia, we do not see that the treatment was carried out by him to perform it.
"The first servants would say that it should be done as we recommended in the hernia that is being treated; namely to place the veins properly on that part of his body which was weakened.
"Care for the wounds according to what has been said until they are healed.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot.
Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
And if there's no other cause of the hernia to the groin, and if so, it is small; return them in every hour.
If the time has passed that, make a small incision in the diaphragm to let out the hernia; and do this by pushing it through the opening of the abdomen as before, which causes it to extend, and place your hand over the area to prevent its coming out.
The cure for it is with cautery just like that mentioned in preceding lines.
Some wounds are to be treated with a second method: the patient should lie on their back between two pillows, and place the hand over the area for preventing the wound from spreading apart in sections proportional to its length as three inches.
And tighten the diaphragm white that is inside so it may not be revealed.
And place your hand over the prominent part of the diaphragm and press upon it from the belly.
Place a cushion over the extremities of the patient's chest area, adjust it with stitches on one side and then on the other
Place a cushion over the extremities of the patient's chest area, do not cover his abdomen from top to bottom, nor extend it further in any direction, but only adjust it for hernia treatment.
Adjust the cushion for hernia treatment as follows: first, mark the field with stitches to prevent it from collapsing or bursting during treatment, and then restore its place once consolidated, ensuring that the chest area is not stretched too much but only adjusted in its center of rupture.
The most important thing at this location, where it should be done to heal.
Chapter Fifty-eight.
Treatment of the testicles.
Treat the testicles as follows in those who have it mollified to avoid any injury to the scrotum and maintain its health:
If necessary when treating it make sure to put the testicles back in their place after being mollified over the natural scrotum and adjust both sides with stitches.
If you wish to put it back in place at first after being mollified over the natural scrotum, make a knot every three or four stitches and secure them with a firm stitch.
"Apply pressure between the sutures; apply a cure for curing of the bruises that may arise from it.
Chapter Ninety-Nine
Castration
It is known that castration in our law is forbidden, except when it is necessary to remember it in this free, and it is not necessary to remember it unless for two reasons: one so that the doctor understands it during interrogation about that, knowing how to cure it; another reason is that the animals of ours need to be castrated at a certain age, especially cows, bulls, pigs, and monkeys.
And therefore it is said that castration must be performed in two ways: either by pulling out or making an incision.
When castration is done by pulling out, the way of doing it is to cut off its testicles and hang them until their death And then place your hand there without touching it.
When castration is done by making an incision and cutting off the section, you should hold the animal's testicles in your left hand while holding its chest with the other hand.
When it has been put between two bodies that are joined together, it should be cut off inside.
It is important to ensure they are properly attached Do not let the cause of the abscess be unnoticed, but rather apply a substance that is gentle on the veins.
This castration method is preferable to one that is done with scissors, as it leaves no cause for the beast to scratch.
Cure the pouch so it can be healed.
[No translation provided]
From the treatment of hernia
Hernia in humans can manifest in two ways: one is when there is a gap between the testicles themselves, or when it is between two testicles figures where the gap could be closed with a finger
Some veins that carry urine from that part of the body can be blocked.
In women there is another variant: when the vagina narrows so much that only two testicles from one man can fit inside, and even then with difficulty.
The treatment consists of three types: for two men, or for a woman. The first sentence translates to "When the joints hurt due to cold humors," which suggests that gout is a type of joint pain caused by an imbalance in body fluids or 'humors'.
The second sentence translates to "in the second section of the chapter on urine, which is in the code of laws," meaning that it discusses rules or regulations related to urination and its control, but without any curative action being mentioned for gout specifically.
This could be a continuation of another text where you are interpreting specific chapters (XXI) relating to some topic such as law, government, or constitutional rights.
"From the cause of women's infertility.
"A pointed cautery is applied in cases of natural causes, to ensure the issue is resolved and it's prevented from spreading; and certain veins are magnified in certain women as well, for example in men during intercourse.
"When you have excessive bleeding from a pointed cautery or other injuries,
"Finally, after the incision is made, it should be kept clean to prevent any infection from arising.
"Then apply a treatment for curing the pain,
"May new wounds should be treated with a cautery and then applied as needed for curing the pain; also it is customary to say 'curse of the gout' when referring to this particular condition.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Accidental refers to injuries caused by a previous illness or injury, as opposed to those that are accidental but not due to any prior condition.
You must do this procedure in the major joints of the body, such as the hips, elbows, knees, or chest, but avoid touching the buttocks and genitals unless necessary for treatment.
The cause of such a pain is usually cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, but it can also be caused by other factors depending on the context.
If there is no apparent cause, you should investigate further and examine closely for any signs of such an issue.
Place a cushion under the patient's thighs, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest to hold their hands.
The woman should lie on her back with her legs spread wide open, and the attendant is supposed to gently stretch both legs so that this subtle trickery becomes visible, and the doctor's examination becomes easier
The attendant is to gently stretch her leg and knee up towards the chest, with a pause in between, in order that this motion does not cause stiffness
If the trickery becomes large and noticeable, doctors advise you to stretch your back or thigh muscles slightly towards it
If the examination is painful, suspend that motion temporarily, and perform it later on
If the medicines causing this pain are not to be found or cannot be purchased elsewhere, then take that remedy from its original source.
The attendant is supposed to provide a wide-bore needle in order for the blood flow not to be obstructed.
Use that remedy from time to time, and supply water as well.
The attendant is supposed to clean the other cavity and ensure it is not blocked.
Some vessels are more sensitive in the extremities of others bones, so be careful with this maneuver. If you are doing that in the region where another cavity is located and it should not be tampered with on any other occasion, do so carefully.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, then it is customarily called gout by doctors
And from curing hemorrhoids and tailbone redness which occurs so in the legs of women.
Hemorrhoids are a common problem in the veins, especially those that occur continuously; and as for old hemorrhoids, it is customary to treat them with cautery.
And you should look in the division of those and the necks of those, and direct to those that receive care and those that do not receive care.
Therefore, hemorrhoids are treated when it is necessary for a greater relief and not just by appearance, the treatment of those that do not heal must be postponed.
Those who are in the orifice of the greater over which a sensation occurs, and those that are cured.
And ensure the woman has a comfortable position, and extend her arms to hold onto something firm, or on a soft surface; indicate those with scars.
And apply powder to those who have sores from the flow of the blood of a specific powder that has healing properties, as well as aloe and similar additives to these.
And place their feet in water for an hour, and put it on ice water.
When veins are constricted, pain occurs in the feet
Spread a fine flour over their body and gently massage it with honey and vinegar, spreading it all over their thighs
If the veins are obstructed, then stick to applying pressure on both arms and massaging the breasts
Spread a mixture of colander water or apple cider vinegar on the area and gently rub it into the skin, sticking to that spot until healed.
Correct it so that it is healed.
The 44th chapter of Capulet
Perforation of the esophagus due to an accident in the major artery.
There are various complications resulting from the major artery being perforated and closed off by a clot: perforation of the esophagus, ulcers, abscesses, fistulas, and other complications related to arteries. And you already mentioned these injuries and the symptoms of them, as well as their consequences in this division.
When the patient is to be prepared for a certain operation that involves a needle, you should know in which manner it shall be done,
If the pain from the needle is at first severe with bruising and fever, sometimes accompanied by redness or swelling of the area, doctors will not make an incision to it, but instead may apply something that helps reduce inflammation as they wait for the pain to subside.
After the patient has been prepared with gauze on a board and laid back on their back while adjusting their feet to be at an angle, their thighs are spread apart, and their arms are relaxed by holding their hands, they will then apply something that suits this purpose for reducing inflammation as needed.
After the needle is used to pierce through the thicker part of the skin and then into the muscle underneath (the cause), it will be guided by its shape in such cases that are performed accordingly.
When administering this instrument through the larger part of the skin, make sure it does not go into the muscle itself and instead should enter just a bit deeper than the patient's skin. If the instrument is larger than the patient's skin, doctors will ensure it does not enter the muscle itself and instead should only go a small amount deeper into the skin to prevent any other instruments from entering through that part of the skin.
The first sentence translates to: "You should place the instrument of the priest on top of it and let the minister hold the instrument and move it around until the orifice is open.
After you have done this, let's take care of the matter and remove it from her head
After the sick person has been washed, let's take them to a place covered with soft and clean oil or fat in which there is no standing water; then wash their back from head to foot in warm oil or fat.
After drying her body, put a soft and clean cloth soaked in warm water on her head.
The treatment is to be given after two days from the time that it was used as medicine.
The sheets are washed as clean as possible with warm water and placed in a bath of lukewarm water mixed with salt; the person is then rinsed thoroughly to remove any remaining dirt or oil, and they should be returned to their bed.
If the cloth has been soiled by the patient, let's make sure you are prohibited from further treatment of that area; instead apply this to where it was previously applied in section B.
Chapter 75
When physicians are summoned to attend second unnatural figures of the body, they show the breasts as well.
The nurse must first determine the nature of the breast to be presented and what is desired in regard to its removal. If it is wished that the nipple be removed, then it should be made clear whether or not this part is a second natural figure and if so, the incision for it will be made at the top, suspending from the abdomen.
Once the breasts have been presented to them, they understand that the belly of him should be opened so that the embryo may descend more easily when it is wished over his head, then cut open the second one and remove any superfluous parts in a good manner.
If this part is another unnatural one and useless, when the embryo is being extracted from his body and head emerges first, or if it is removed from his head and belly comes out, then the hand of him should be placed on his head or stomach, in such a way as to make all figures unnatural.
The nurse must be knowledgeable and discreet in every matter she handles, guarding against errors and disappointment.
The first sentence means "Now pay attention to this figure.
When the fever is over and it affects the head in a natural way, then it is very severe on women and makes them feel difficult to breathe. The pain they suffer from that already become unbearable, as do the pains of women tend towards being more severe. And when the cold air penetrates into their bodies, women's chests begin to suffer from this phenomenon.
Then the servant takes a small measure and pours it into the second container, where this is poured in order to saturate it with humidity. The servant enters the belly of the woman from which they must extract
If this is not necessary, then call for a physician who specializes in the treatment of ulcers and ulcers of the intestines.
The servant orders him to begin, and the physician places his face in front of it while he is speaking, putting his mouth and nose near for one hour so that the air can be inhaled as much as possible.
If two of them are initially very difficult to remove from the beginning, then call for someone who is weak in order to gradually reduce those until they are gone. If it is not necessary to be done immediately, then the woman lies down on a mat and has her feet lowered, and they place a cushion over it so that she will not feel the impact.
When the body's major veins are torn asunder and death ensues, doctors prescribe those remedies that relieve the pain of the limbs or heart
When the child is born and enters into contact with your hands, you should immediately wet them gently as quickly as possible, then cradle the baby in both arms, hold it tightly, and gradually remove one foot at a time
If the child defecates into the thighs, you should command them to wipe it off immediately, and after wiping that area should be dried quickly because if God wills it may occur again
If you do not wish for this to occur again, after returning the child gradually to its original position until it is in accordance with that second normal figure, because then there may be another instance of defecation.
If you prohibit all of that which I have recommended, then apply a paste made from old wine and sugar dissolved in water to the wound, then wash it thoroughly with clean sand or mud, and place the gauze over the area where the female's finger is located, covering the bottom of the belly. Then you should apply a cold compress soaked in water until it reaches its maximum extent and coolness.
When joints are affected by cold humors that permeate every part of the body, including pain in the feet, it is commonly known as gout among doctors. After a period of numbness lasting for one hour, the physician will then apply a sharp cautery to open sores and extract any discharge from the mouth, after which they press down on the belly button in order to prevent it from bursting forth with great force.
The patient should lie down flat on their back with one of their legs elevated. Put a cushion under the patient's head to elevate it if they are not able to raise one of their legs by themselves.
If they are unable to do so themselves, the doctor should place a cushion under their head and apply firm pressure on both thighs simultaneously, in order to prevent them from coming out of position.
If the child is vomiting, the doctor should place it on its side and support their head while supporting their leg in a second natural position to prevent them from coming out of position.
The patient should lie flat on their back with their feet and body aligned, as the doctor is now giving a second assessment to check for any other issues. The mother should hold onto her child's foot and gently pull it back slowly as she is checking if the procedure was easy to perform.
When you are done and after performing any recommended oil and mucus treatments, the doctor will now assess how easy it was to perform the procedure.
The doctor should then gently pull it back slowly and place the child on their side while holding them tightly to ensure they stay put. "The fetus falls upon the back.
When dealing with a horrible situation of this kind, consider that the pain will subside if you remove some of the excess moisture.
If a fetus is suspended over the face and the neck of another person, you should remove that part to prevent suffocation or drowning.
The person should try to move the fetus away from where it was previously located and ask if there are any injuries that they need medical attention for, unless otherwise indicated by a doctor.
"The death of twins or many fetuses. If twins are separated prematurely and some of them die from three or four months on, it is strange and terrible to happen; but this may be the result of nature's causes, not caused by living beings.
If twins are separated at once or separately after birth and some die from the same cause as a fetus due to natural causes, such deaths would be considered as one death for accounting purposes; but if they died because of medical reasons that were recommended by doctors, it should be recorded separately.
If there were any unnatural figures and you have confirmed that it is not due to any illness or injury of the child, then record these as deaths from other causes.
"When the female patient is very delicate and requires ease, subtlety, and patience, then let the physician proceed with great caution and gentleness as he prepares for health.
The remembrance of this can only be made from the embryo or abortion
The number of women who have abortions is seven: one and two, three, four, five, six, seven
And as such the science of the female patient is very important for this purpose, and therefore pause to do as with that
The 66th chapter of a book.
From the extraction of the dead body when it is deceased.
When you cure the dead body as mentioned in the chapter of medicine and it is not fatal use a surgical operation if the woman is healthy and does not have any accidents that may cause her to lose life.
The doctor will place the woman's head downward and elevate her hips
The minister should be placed on one side or supported by the other, in order that his body does not extend beyond the extraction of the dead body.
Place a wet cloth in her mouth to cool her down, place ice on the back of his neck and forehead, and put an ice pack on his stomach and chest
Place a cloth on her hand to cool it down and place ice on the back of her neck in order to prevent any injuries occurring in that area.
In this situation: if you think the body is prepared to do so, then you should put ice on his head, or his chest, or his neck, or his beard, or in the furcula area of his throat, or in the places where his shoulders meet, or in any other areas that are convenient.
If you decide to do this on the foot of him, then ice should be placed in his heel or in the side of his back
Put ice on his elbow to cool it down and make sure that the curve of him is in the correct place where there's an area between your left hand and arm
Place another ice pack in the appropriate area of his body if necessary, so that it can stay on for a longer duration without causing any discomfort only as long as is needed.
The first sentence translates to "The illness of this patient is now entirely clear.
"The condition of this patient has improved greatly, and if any part is still held back, the doctors are ordering that it be loosened more.
"If the part of the child is already detached, then loosen it gently and carefully in that place where it was originally tightened.
"If the hand is being held by something else and cannot be reduced through the patient's own strength, then cover it with a cloth.
"Do this to both hands as well.
"If the head of the patient is large or the obstruction occurs in its cavity, then enter between the spigots and spread open the opening, or that which resembles a tool known as 'alundat', shape of which will come to resemble those of other instruments used on such parts.
"Do the same thing if the patient's head is naturally large, and cover it with something to prevent injury, or that which resembles a tool known as 'alundat', used shape of which will come to resemble those of other instruments used on such parts.
When a person's heart is outside their chest, then pain occurs in the area where moisture has accumulated
If it's not complicated or excessive, I will consider it as the next sentence to translate
If you find it necessary to place a cushion or put something under their belly button, then do so to prevent moisture from accumulating there.
If the task is about their feet, then place them on the floor and direct them to put it in front of the greater opening in the mouth.
If you need to remove the belly and buttocks, then take that piece of cloth and cover your hand with it, and place them between the legs so that moisture runs through those areas.
If the other members are to be opened and come out of the head, then place your hand gently between their legs; if the greater opening is closed, then place your hand in front of it, or two inches away from it, and pull that piece into its mouth, and put it there.
If the greater opening is blocked by a cushion that prevents it from being moistened properly, then do not put anything there, and instead you should administer fluids to counteract the effects of wet heat. The physician applies compresses containing cooling and moistening agents
If the foot is on its side, doctors may possibly apply this compress to it as well: and when applying to live tissue
And if that's not possible, then the doctor will put them aside and move on.
Do not insert any other causes between those two sentences.
After completing all your work, the doctor will apply this compress to any part of the body that is affected by pain.
If you find flow from blood, then doctors should administer a further compress
You have seen a woman in her belly who was dead and brought it on another stretcher, and when the other person died, The moment you arrive at the patient's side, inflate the air-filled compress, and begin to dress their wounds.
The cure was applied to her for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
When you put aside all other causes that attract strongly and remove one arm, and after passing through many days, and remove the second arm; and you were too tired to move around in her belly.
The bones of a dead man
And then you should remove the bandage and carefully inspect the bones of the deceased, looking for any damage that may have occurred over time.
You should not be surprised if the cause is unknown and the doctor performs further tests to determine the reason for treatment.
Of the instruments that are necessary in order to extract the body.
The form of validity on which it is based:
This is the form of strength in which two people are equalized at their extremities. However this form may be more subtle and flexible than others, allowing for greater variation in the way that it is used.
And its length is the distance between two fingers and a thumb; it measures about five centimeters or less. Its width varies with each digit, being greater than that of one finger by a few millimeters.
These two are inserted into the mouth of the greater when you rotate both prescribed virtues.
Another way of doing this was as subtle and quick
And if you use a forceps to do it, And remember that the distance in length is equal to the width of a palm, and the latitude of each one is two thumbs
And if you want to stretch the foot more, then put your hand underneath it and lift it so that the toes are spread out. And make sure your hand is placed on the tool just as firmly as you would with a pair of tweezers, following the amount of pressure you want from the opening into which the measurement must be taken so that it will do what you want.
The way that was customary among ancients:
The way in which the deed is executed
The way to perform a coup de grace
And hold the forceps in the extremity, similarly, and sometimes the handle is held that way with tweezers, similarly to this one, which holds the other end tightly and firmly. The way of performing a coup de grace quickly
The way in which you gently remove a spine:
"The form of pain that stings.
The form of pain that has caused the feet to be separated.
Two servants placed on either side.
These instruments are used in their exercise when the species of them are multiplied and prepared for use; and when it is necessary to employ many of these instruments, according to its nature and what is required by art or skill, let them be applied by the persons who have been trained for this purpose.
Do not use these instruments unless there is a necessity to do so and it cannot be excused.
The second exercise of the day.
When the second exercise is finished you should command your attendant to hold it in place and then gently remove any straps that may be holding it down tight; stretch out your hand over its mouth and nostrils if necessary, and if this is not done properly, do as needed.
Otherwise, you should take a cloth and wipe away any cold sweat that might have entered your mouth; then gently blow your nose with paper or the back of your hand in order to calm yourself down and remove the phlegm from your throat as smoothly and quickly as possible. When herbs or some of these are submerged in water on a stove, and put it over fire.
Then place the cannula into the mouth of the patient, and keep in mind that it should evaporate to the cavity of the chest.
Then open up your second nostril as quickly as possible.
Then apply this treatment and if it does not work, ask the nurse to submerge your left arm in olive oil or micellar water for about 10 minutes, then put that into the chest cavity with a cannula as soon as possible. Then adjust it to both right and left sides easily.
If the mouth of the patient is obstructed, we recommend using a suction and medical treatment with herbs.
If the causes of all that we have recommended are not resolved, please keep in mind to avoid discussing it further and instead focus on this issue alone: if there is a blockage at the mouth of the patient, then put the needle into his nose as quickly as possible.
When the pain arises, elevate his head and abdomen, and let this medicine be given to him as he pleases.
The ancient remedy is a mixture of warm water and fresh figs.
Form of the instrument through which the woman will be subjected to the retention of menstrual periods and the second one:
It may happen that it is seen or heard.
The subtle extremity of the hand and broad extremity over the flame, and the cauterization is stopped over the fingers' fire.
It will be necessary to consume that which is subjected to that cauterization, or try another one.
The child's anus was not perforated.
If the child does not have a hole in his anus and the cheeks are not perforated, which will be done delicately and carefully. And if the woman has not given birth to that child yet, perform it through her vagina and if she does not allow it, perforate it carefully in front of her mouth, while being careful to avoid touching her breast.
And when you place the enfused thread on his eyes and eyebrows, be sure that it is well done in terms of size.
If you think he may vomit, put a spoon in his mouth to stop him from vomiting, and hold it until the child wants to eat again.
The first sentence translates to "The anal sphincter becomes tightened due to constipation or from hemorrhoids. If this tightening is not cured, it will be treated with the same care that has been given for constipation and piles.
"Treatment of fistulas that have developed.
Fistulas that develop in the anal canal or between different parts of it are treated with care and good treatment options provided by doctors.
"It is a fistula.
If the node has been long standing and covered with white or reddish fine spots, and some of these fistulas penetrate others.
These penetrators are known for exiting and opening up wounds; some veins are used to prevent the exit of these veins from escaping.
These fistulas grow into the bladder space and into the rectum of the vagina; they also penetrate between the muscles of the thigh, or between the veins of the leg.
When a fistulas penetrates into the anus and not to penetrate it is necessary for doctors to examine it carefully or try to pierce it gently when this would be possible without causing harm.
When that happens, the doctor will examine it gently or probe around for any signs of an abscess in order to determine if a puncture should be made without causing harm.
When there is no obstruction in the urethra and no discharge of semen or urine, as you have said, then pain arises from the bladder, doctors call it cystitis.
When the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the vein of the groin, then the meaning of it is to be discharged from urine and prevention of its further progress necessitates medical treatment being taken.
When the fistula is penetrating into a joint or into the ear and causes pain in its path, then the sign of it is that one tries to penetrate it here if it is not torn through the ear, and causes pain in its path from the start; and when it fails, there will be no further attempts at treatment.
In all of those fistulas that are penetrating there is no cure for them and the treatment varies greatly from doctor to doctor as it remains a mystery.
When it is not penetrating and does not cause any harm, then treatment should be sought as recommended by your doctor, and once you have done so, proceed with caution.
It is that the patient lies between your thighs and raises their legs into a position where they are inclined towards them belly, and the cushion will be placed at the bottom of the bed to prevent the attempt from penetrating if you know the fistula is torn through.
When a patient's thighs are opened up between them, it is customary for someone to enter that opening and put their hand inside the cavity.
If you see that the attempt to insert something has been discovered as an intrusion or penetration, then it is customary for someone else to interpose themselves between the thighs and that opening in order to prevent further intrusion; if not, because there was no injury, they would say so as well.
However, these are just opinions of others who think they know better.
For the medical treatment that is supposed to be done with the first attempt, you should make an incision into the fistula itself, and then insert it into the cavity; if it fails in the fistula opening or comes out of another part of the body, do so three times until all those affected parts are adjusted fistulas that resemble a quill.
Then cure the affected parts with bandages wrapped around it to stop them from coming out and heal wounds that occur when not cured promptly; if healed, good is so; otherwise, you will not be able to heal any part of it another way.
If the attempt to enter through that opening does not penetrate or penetrates only slightly and then comes out on the skin around it, then you will seal off that opening from the beginning of the fistula; once you've sealed it, make sure to also seal off any other openings, even if they occur at a later time by the same part. Then release the attempt through the sealed hole so that it can come out and heal.
When fistulas have formed in those parts that are assembled into a needle, they cannot heal themselves from any cause.
If a fistula frequently occurs between you and your partner when cleaning those parts, it is customary for the surgeon to cauterize them using either a heated cautery or an acute instrument like a needle.
When the cold abscesses are located on either side of a joint or corner of the body part, it is customary to cure them by applying hot oil and burning the tough flesh with fire until it has been burned through and consolidated.
Those medicines in which there is strictness or dryness - when the treatment has already been restored and healed without recurrence.
If a fistula has entered the anus of the body part and is elongated on its surface, they will insert it into the anal canal and examine it there.
If the attempt is accompanied by swelling of the diaphragm or flesh and there are pains to penetrate it, then they will not operate on that but with faith in trust alone.
There are three ways to administer it: they either cauterize that into trust; or they will perform surgery to cure the hernia by inserting a finger up its possible entrance and performing treatment in accordance with faith alone; and do not operate through any other way so as not to cause the intestines to come out, and hold your hand over their body part; and prepare it for them according to whether that much pus is light or heavy. When the attempt to enter into the fistula has been completed and it's inside the body in the region of the anus near its surface area on the buttocks or around the edge of the anus. The pain will then begin to take effect immediately.
When inserting into that tight, sealed opening of the anus or surrounding area around it, approach insertion by being very careful to enter through the fistula once you are inside.
If you are penetrating the edge of the anus intentionally, then when inserting into that flesh gently insert it into the anus; and withdraw your hand with both hands trying to put them as close together as possible, try again, and if after a day or two, and when the penis is inserted in the flesh, then gently remove it while avoiding causing those parts of skin to become broken.
And carefully apply the plaster over that which has solidified and healed.
If the orifice of the fistula is not being penetrated, then let that be avoided when preparing yourself for it, or simply do not attempt to penetrate there at all, and instead put some care over that which has healed.
The shape of the sheath to which the fistula is severed can be quite acute and another part may not be as acute, in such a case it's not necessary to insert into that, similarly.
In those cases where blood runs in between the incision and the skin of them
Those cases are second to third degree burns, either between the buttocks or above them where fatty tissues are affected Those are small and large burns that cover the palms of the hands and feet as well as the buttocks
Those cases may be due to a lack of moisture or the presence of irritant water that causes a small burn area to gradually worsen and is second to the color of the skin.
The cure for that ailment is to command the patient to lie down and express themselves, between which time their burn disappears and the inflammation of the joints appears. When you cover them with a cloth or bandage and place them in water at your own risk, it is advisable to remove those sores from the skin.
If the cloth is not sufficient to keep them wet and moisturize them, cover them with a coarse or flannel material, remove them from their ties, place them on some powder that has been prepared for this purpose in the incision area, so that they may be applied there instead of cautery; or apply cautery if the matter is described elsewhere. The physician then applies a cure to both of them so they may be healed.
If the rectum has become obstructed with excrement and pain occurs due to this obstruction, then gently massage the area of the buttocks next to it so that the feces may be expelled gently from there without causing further injury.
If the hemorrhoids are causing pain and itches there around the anus, then apply a cure to them all so they may be healed.
Then, in case you want to apply a cure on the same day as the previous one: use a fine bandage and insert it into an arrow so that it can penetrate the anus gently but deeply; afterwards wrap it around both sides of the finger from where it was taken out, and remove the bandage from the needle. Stretch the hemorrhoid in firmness, then firmly press down on the finger and extract the arrow.
Apply it to all of them, leaving out one or two, in order that the excess fluid may drain from there.
Then apply it over the buttocks with hot oil or cream, and place a cushion under them so that they may rest. When you enter the room, first attend to that box over there, when it is full, care for those inside of it or another cure in order for them to be healthy
If the method is ancient and does not work in that case, doctors will advise you to pierce them or tear off with your finger into which they become moist and hostile to those who want to consolidate consolidation. And if it's consolidated then it should be cured
Doctors will tell you to first get rid of the most superficial ones which have become inflamed, and then cure those that are healed.
You should know that swelling is crucial and it will appear in all over the body especially on the feet and hands, and you must take care of it to prevent such pain occurs.
You should know that if it infiltrates in the pathway of cold, and is located on your hands or feet, and is eliminated from its way; then cure that one.
If you wish, cautery as mentioned earlier in the passage.
The small round belly button on top of the body is very itchy.
It's important to stretch and scratch that area gently or carefully so as not to break it. If you wish, burn it with fire or medicine immediately after we said.
The small round belly button on top of the body is very itchy and when it becomes very sore and painful to touch or squeeze, itching spreads around the skin.
It is important to gently pierce it with a needle of pain or burn, and hold that over the itchy area until it contains the circle of the needle's edge; then remove it from inside the skin, and cleanse the itch.
If you wish to burn it with a burning stick or any other way like this
The edge of the needle should be gentle and smooth to avoid perforation or cutting; surrounded in such a way that it can remove the itching sensation and its movement.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Do you mean "the instruments used to administer the cautery"?
Some cauteries are made of gold or silver or iron; some cauteries are made from small and large instruments depending on the ones used to administer them; for example, that which was used in the treatment of children is smaller; and those that cause pain or injury are small.
The larger and smaller cauteries
The end of the cannula through which it is inserted into the body should be wide enough to accommodate that manner, and also at where it is inserted there should be as many times.
The end of the body through which it is inserted into the anus should be blunt (not pointed), and after that there are two passages on one side, and one passage on the other side, so that both ends may accommodate different sizes of arrows or bolts.
And there is a pouch into which the medicines for bladder stones or liver bile are placed, and its lining is one palm (flat).
It has openings through which it can be rolled up, and the space between those passages is determined by its size (width).
"Insert the needle in this small and tight space, ensuring it is of the right size or width; adjust as necessary when the cushion stops holding the intestines, tightening to prevent any leakage through the chest opening between two distinct ribs.
"Insert the needle gently and slowly into the patient's anus, ensuring it is of the right size or width; raise their legs above them with cushions on either side and place one cushion at the head to prevent the intestines from coming out; then insert it into the rectum as far as possible without causing any leakage through the chest opening between two distinct ribs; finally remove both the intestines and the patient, placing their legs against a wall.
"If medicine forces them to expel it completely, give as much time as necessary; and if not at all, the quicker they are.
"If you have successfully inserted a needle into the patient's anus for evacuation of their bowels and expulsion of any other items they may possess, then attend to tightening up the cautery until it is fully constricted.
"If the needle has entered too deeply or has caused bleeding from the anus, then tighten up the cautery slowly and carefully; only use the methods of constriction that children practice.
"With regard to the sores.
You have already mentioned in the division of care for ulcers that it was necessary to do so, and you should continue doing this with the same care given to physicians second time around.
Therefore, ulcers are divided into two types depending on whether they are caused by cold humors or the location of where they occur.
The causes of the pain that you feel are due to cold humors or to a sprain in your arm or leg, or to striking the body with blows or kicks, or to stabbing it with knives and daggers, or from being suffocated by a press on top of you.
The ulcers that occur in the parts of your body are due to a blow or a kick on top of your head, ears, chest, stomach and belly button, as well as all the members of your body.
You are recommending that the care for some ulcers should follow this reasoning and rule over others.
You start with ulcers on the head, remembering that it is the first to occur from the beginning of this chapter.
When you have a simple ulcer on the head and it is not broken, doctors consider: if it's due to injury or trauma, that one is considered very serious and should be treated quickly with caution, and otherwise go for the second option, unless there are prohibitive causes of bleeding, in which case do nothing.
The first sentence translates to: "The flapotomy of the contrary part is plagued.
If there was no cause for concern, it means that you should massage the vein and not apply any pain on skin or tissue.
After removing the bandage if it comes off easily and without leaving any residue on oil or skin then it is recommended to strip it completely.
If you are sure that the cautery has been applied properly, after removing the bandage if it is recently washed and the area has not changed then it is recommended to apply a small amount of lotion or cream on top of the bandage as needed.
If the area had been recently washed, pause and cover it with clean cloth until it is healed.
If the bandage is large or covers a significant portion of the skin and your lips are not wide enough to cover it without difficulty, adjust those around the wound according to what you recommend from the surgeon.
If the bandage had been accidentally torn off from its base and only a small strip is left, then apply medical grade adhesive to cover it up again and restore skin appropriately in place of the cloth, and command the patient that their wounds should be dressed with gauze caps and forms fittingly across them until they are healed.
When gangrene is found in the thigh, you must immediately cut away all this flesh and get to it quickly, and apply something for it.
If the artery or vein from which blood flow may still occur is not closed by medical means, you should inquire about the artery itself and if gangrene is found in that, remove it immediately; or if necessary, cautery on to where the clot was removed
If the wounds are simple and small, you can easily cause their healing by applying this powder that consolidates it when applied over those areas
The purpose of the powder is to: first, stop bleeding from dragon wounds; second, cause no-extinct wounds to heal by three days; third, to treat all cuts and bruises, filling them up completely; fourth, to constrict and coagulate the wound so that it heals well over time.
Then mix the powder with water and apply it, making sure to do this only when it is not applied elsewhere that could harm you, as medicine cannot be administered if one's health worsens.
This does not work alone on wounds that also have dragon sickness.
The operation is performed on the large veins when it's necessary to be supported by those and their arms, and the recent cuts are located there where the artery has not been altered
If the artery has been altered and is located on a limb during warm weather, then do not place the poultice at that location but instead cover those arms with gentle compresses of water and honey if you are able to find them; otherwise, cover their limbs with fine sand or meal mixed together until they heal.
If the vein fracture occurs in an eye, then you remove that from sight.
Cure fractures of the skull by applying a poultice here where it is swollen.
The veins of the neck.
If the vein occurs in the neck, then doctors do not differentiate it from other veins when they are simple.
If the nerve of the neck is internal or artery, then it's necessary to avoid its cure in this way, as when you sting and cut that with vinegar and iron, so that it becomes acid and harms the nerves around it; therefore, avoid that. Do not place the poultice on any vein that causes it to freeze, as the substance of the nerves is frozen and its continuation is at risk for the whole body; therefore, do not use this treatment on all members.
When the urine becomes cold and this chills permeate through all veins of the body or only a few, it is customary that doctors call it rheumatism
If the disease becomes large and spreads to cover many parts of the body or just a few, then doctors administer sutures as an incision on the thighs is made, and they take care that it heals without becoming infected.
If the disease is deep or occurs only on one small part of the body, doctors perforate it in that location as quickly as possible.
If the disease has already infiltrated an artery and causes bleeding, doctors may separate or remove it, or they may cauterize it if necessary to prevent further damage.
If the disease has already infiltrated the spine and all of it, but saves the veins in the belly, doctors attach a strap to the thigh on which they make an incision above the groin, do not touch that, except for removing or cauterizing that if necessary; straighten that so as to restore its natural position, and place it at rest, and treat it with respect for several days; and prepare it with such care that when it is infected and inflamed inside it will be healed.
If the disease is already in the esophagus and painful to swallow, doctors will try to remove it or cut out all of it if possible; otherwise they will treat that as if it were the beginning of a new outbreak, and separate and remove it from its location.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this gout. If the fistulas are closed, then the ulcers should be treated as follows in its capital.
If it is a fistula of the anus or scrotum and sometimes from inside as well, doctors should consider that if the patient enters one, then the fistula is fatal.
If there is not deep penetration and the fistula has recently occurred on its surface then doctors should pause it to prevent this from occurring again in that place of depth inside, returning towards the heart, and causing the patient discomfort.
If the fistula is not recently caused by an outside factor, then doctors should pause in treating it with humidity to prevent moisture from reaching that place of depth inside. They also put the patient into bed over it so that movement can be prevented and the treatment continues.
If the fistula has been open for three days or more and does not cause any of those complications such as heart trouble, narrowing of the artery, tremor in the body, or a stricture on the urethra then doctors should consider that it is saved, they also cure its external sores and other treatments until it is healed.
When a patient's illness is excused, you should give them rest, and then the doctors will know that they have been cured: treat it according to its type
If the abscess is caused by a small incision or a scratch on the surface of the chest or arm, then cure it as previously described in stitching if large, otherwise with a poultice if small.
If you have already given a poultice on the ear or nose and it has not helped, then tear away those pustules if they are separated from each other. If the pustules are not separate, then let them be pierced with a needle to extract their contents which is easy.
And the other abscesses will come out of those members in the same way that we've said
The abdominal ones
The situation which occurs in the abdomen is either large or small or medium-sized.
If the abscess is small and it is difficult to reach with another means, then do not make an incision unless you are certain that extracting it from its place would be too much, for if this were difficult, because of the nature of what was just mentioned earlier, the way in which it is done may become difficult.
And there you have it, the first sentence translated into English.
You know that the belly stitches are second after four weeks, many of them heal up in the same way as the other incisions on the chest
Two different sutures may have similarities with the other ones, but they may also be similar to the belly stitches
Recommend each one in its own exposure and declaration
When the hernia is small and no other cause for it can be found, then in one of two ways it may heal: either by reducing the tension on that part as mentioned earlier or when the hernia has been inflated with cold air.
When that is so, do you submerge a sponge in hot water or cold water? You can heat it up and squeeze out the air, or cool it down and try to blow through it.
Some ways that might help in this case are: a hot water bath alone can resolve it.
When you want to try and resolve the swelling of the hernia by wetting it with lukewarm water, as that is gentle on it compared to cold or hot water.
When you have opened up this space and are ready for the operation, the pains will cease as a small instrument is inserted.
The first operation requires a lot of preparation, when it's completed, and nothing more remains to be done in terms of care and feeding.
From the instrument itself
The first part is acute, and the other non-acute; subtle extremity, not having the subtlety of a feather, has its own subtlety
And then, after the fluid has been amplified and removed from the body, doctors will make sure that the reduction is as close to its natural form in its own place, if possible, as much as possible.
When the disruption is wide and at the base of the abdomen occurs, doctors will advise you to place your head on its back, rest their legs as well; and if it's at the base of the abdomen that the pains occur, doctors will tell you to put your head down and chest up.
Similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, doctors will tell you to rest your head and chest side by side so that the pain in the part where the fluid was located may be more intense than the other one.
When you are treating a large area or small area
In the smaller areas pause to make a test of it and then apply this treatment between your thighs as shown below
The common procedure for suturing: one that approaches the edge of the incision or use a longer needle depending on the size of the wound; and push the needle in as far as it can go without going through both ends of the incision, unless you are making an internal incision, then make sure to keep the needle inside until the end.
After pushing the needle in as much as possible, take two stitches and sew them together to close the wound, leaving some extra length of thread; then take another needle and pass it through the hole you made with your first stitch, tying off the end tightly so that no suture will be visible from outside.
If the needles are small between delicacy and subtlety, they will easily penetrate the flesh; but if they are thick then it is difficult to do this as fine threads may not fit through the skin well enough.
When the needle is inserted into both of his extremities at once and in such a manner that flesh does not touch the ground or be damaged and it gets stuck to its place, then
Do not prolong the sutures so that the bandage is forbidden from consolidation
Then place the fragile sutures into both of his extremities so that he does not move or get out of bed, and cover it with an expanding dust flap, which should be made to fit over both of them, and let him know when it is already consolidated.
These specific sutures are suitable for small bandages as it is convenient to use one or two needles through the sutures; however, if there are more than that many should be placed within them.
The second suture is as follows: and you should administer the four sutures from the thigh to both of his lower extremities in a row, using one needle that is tightly wrapped around its length with fine and large thread.
Then pull out the needle from that thread-parted point to start it, in order for its faithful retention to hold tightly and firmly onto the bandage as the second suture of wrapping around them is being made.
The distance between each of the fingers should be measured by the thickness of this man's thumb.
This finger understands the men.
This finger understands the men, and it caused pain to a man in his belly who was lying on his back, which was the rupture of the larger vein of one palm, and it occurred around two palms of the foot, and it was the rupture in the leg of the member; and you should reduce that deposit so that the intestine had been out for xxiv hours.
The vein was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or more, and you should cure it by using ointments and apply to that place with gentle motions, and converse with its remedies.
The other doctors had already given up on it not being cured; and because you did not cure it quickly, which was in a place where no remedy was available or effective, we placed a cushion over the vein two days later with assiduous application of cold water until it healed.
May you give me two special recipes for sutures in case something like that happens again?
It is customary to use thread from the back of the hand to make an incision in the front part as described.
When the needle penetrates through the bone and reaches the second joint of the limb, it should proceed further into the body; however, if it enters another joint at that point, it must withdraw from the first joint and move to the other.
When the needle penetrates and reaches another joint of the limb, it should then proceed to penetrate into that other joint instead; if in both joints at once, return to the first joint and move on to the next one.
When penetrating, if you reach that joint which causes penetration into the limb in front of it to penetrate simultaneously; otherwise, proceed as before.
As you enter the space between that bone and the limb, place the needle on the side of the joint which causes penetration into the limb in front of it to penetrate simultaneously; otherwise, continue as before. Then remove the previous needle from its cavity and put a new one at that bone's opposite side within this area of the body, where the limb is located; then place the new needle in the first cavity mentioned earlier.
After that, proceed to perform a second procedure on the other side of the body and another side in the area mentioned earlier; do everything as before with this one also.
When the stitches are opened on the skin of a patient, you must wash your hands with soap and water before touching them again
The second type of stitches is used to close wounds and is recommended by doctors as it provides the best possible outcome for the patient. It involves taking another part of the body (arm or leg) to apply pressure on the wound in addition to the first, ensuring that all parts are kept pressed together naturally through a process called "natural compression dressing".
Insert the needle in one part of the wound (usually the thigh), and then go through to the other part, ensuring that all parts are pressed together tightly with two compressions applied on each side by placing hands over the area, thereby preventing any movement or leakage from the wound site.
Then remove those bandages and insert one bandage through the wound into the other part of the body on each side, making sure to compress both wounds while also keeping them separated as far as possible from external pressure.
This type of stitching is superior to the usual one and is recommended for use in critical cases where immediate closure is necessary.
This is the sermon of Gaul
And afterwards, put the needle in carefully and go slowly through it to avoid any harm to your own body, as you must do with the previous wounds that you have made close together.
It is more difficult to suture in the region of the belly than it is in other parts of the abdomen.
The game of healing from wounds becomes a trial for another wound.
When you have already dealt with the recently inflicted wound and it has been healed and dressed up well, then the doctor will rest on that spot for a while.
If the wound has already been treated, then the doctor will rest on it while you attend to other wounds that require urgent attention and care.
If you are not present for the medicines, then the doctor will rest on it while you attend to other wounds, care for your hands and feet, place a bandage over that and wait until tomorrow when you need more attention as long as the wounds are simple.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the main parts of the body and cause pain in the hands or feet, it is customary to apply a poultice made from fresh laurel leaves on those areas where the pain occurs, holding them down with pressure until they turn into a blistery substance.
If there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels themselves (i.e., constipation), it should be treated immediately by a physician, and if a hernia protrudes into its cavity then that must also be treated.
You know that the abscess in the large intestine is treated with more urgency than one in the small bowels.
The treatment for an abscess in the "gugunu" bowel is difficult to treat and cannot be treated by poultice alone; this is because of the great number of veins that are present in it and its size which makes it quite different from others, as well as its proximity to the nervous system.
If you want to treat a poultice on the body part that causes it and make it effective quickly then press down on the area where the poultice is placed so as to compress both bowels equally.
If the space has already been opened and it is either black or white, then put that poultice very close to the affected area so as to prevent bleeding from veins and arteries.
"Open the space between their thighs and put a cushion underneath them, then place another servant on their legs as well, also one on their chest holding their hands so that they may not come out through the opening.
"Recall of hernias when they occur in the intestine.
"When disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it can be restored with stitches from underneath of the abdomen, which used to patch over a previous hernia on the right side of the stomach, an old one that was torn open and became a fistula, causing constant discharge and swelling.
"If you were unable to follow the care procedure and it was not performed correctly, may cease any attempt on making it happen as the area has healed.
"If the area has healed but you are concerned about an injury to your abdomen, then avoid any attempt on making it happen as well, prevent it from coming out through these methods.
"And if you have had a hernia in the intestine and it is small, then recall this method: hold two strips of cloth tightly together, tie them to both ends of the opening, and when you put your mouth over those strips and pull on them very hard, close your lips against one another so that no part comes out.
The first sentence translates to "Place another cushion under their thighs...
"... and return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, not allowing it to protrude outside...
"... and if the intestine is too small for that purpose, then you should remove it completely...
"That's just another way of faith and hope.
"And if the space is too large or wide, especially in a narrow intestine...
"Use caution when applying heat and pressure.
"Be aware that any ulcer or abscess that occurs when applying heat and pressure is called a fistula.
"A fistula is actually an abscess that bleeds when it's pressed on.
"The abscess can become moist, and if the moisture is removed quickly enough... This humidity is moist, scarce, thick, and subtle.
The doctor has described all those causes and their methods to heal in this section of the book on medicine.
You should know how to perform surgery to treat fistulas, as that is one way it can be treated surgically.
Fistulas can occur anywhere in the body and may be caused by issues with veins or arteries, nerves, the brain, bowels, bladder, kidneys, chest ribs, spinal ligaments, or any combination of joints, being close to the main limb or similar.
When there is a fistula caused by difficult surgery wounds that cannot be cured or treated, and ignorance occurs in this condition, then the finger should remain motionless and inactive
If there is a fistula of any depth that penetrates into this location and causes pain, and you hope for the cure to occur, but cannot prevent it from going further down inside your body, then the finger will try to stop or hold it in place
If the fistula is bent or twisted, then the finger will try to gently push it away from your body as this will lessen and curve its course so that you can find a cure for it
If the fistula is extremely painful then there may be nothing you can do to stop or treat it.
Once the fingers are placed where they should be, then you will gradually wet the area until all of it is covered in moisture to soften and loosen any existing adhesions and scar tissue
Carefully place the fingers in the appropriate location so that you know if it is a long or short fistula and whether there are any existing adhesions at its base or it is just one of many that have been formed over time, then continue to apply gentle pressure with your hand on top of this area while also considering the possible causes of the pain and what the medical term for it might be.
When you have positioned yourself over all those causes of the pain that is causing it to show up clearly and in its right place or part, then you consider if it's a gouty attack near by or elsewhere related to joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any other location from which you know it came.
You then seal it off as soon as you learn from which artery of his body it arose, and this is in such a filtration that has caused corruption in the blood vessels, and also to find its origin in the roots or tendons, and cure whatever was inside
If the attack is deep in nature and you know it's second-degree, then cauterize that area as much as possible, making sure to cover all the corrupted blood vessels; also administer wrapped bandages of acute medicines into its cavity, which we have put under control
And then seal it off with this wrapped bandage of acute medicine, which will slowly dissolve all the corruption in its cavity.
And afterwards you restore that by means of healthy flesh regeneration into what has been corrupted.
If it is not cured through this method, then you seal off the area as instructed previously.
"The cause of the fistula is unknown and should you certify this, then ask for an inquiry or order a second one to confirm it if you don't forbid any vein, nerve, or main member as we have said.
"If the abscess is opened and there is no corruption or decay within it, then treat that part as we have said; but if corruption has been found in it, apply a treatment to cure it.
"If not healthy and the abscess is as before, then you must know that you have not eradicated completely all corruption; so if you find out about it in a second time with great care and precision do reason for its cause and cure of it to strengthen your arm.
"Then if it is healthy, so be it; but if not, then you must know that this corruption has infiltrated deeply into the body and could not have been eradicated completely.
"If the abscess is small or it might be possible to remove that part with subtle forceps as they are suitable for this.
"If all of your limbs, then carefully remove everything and leave none to the strength of yours.
"If there is not any cause for the wetness or it has been proven false and in all respects, then consider the limbs or nerves if they are present here, and remove the bones.
When you have made the incision to open up your bones for this operation, lay the skin flap over here so it can cover that area and prevent any of them from coming out, and keep the skin flap tight while preventing any movement inside the wound.
If you are afraid of it, place a bandage soaked in alcohol on top to prevent the incision from becoming infected or from soaking through the cloth, and keep the flap tightly over that area until they separate the bones and take away their traction.
If it is a large wound on the leg or groin area then use that as well for the other parts of the body where this has become infected only, and then cover it back up with skin flap.
If that is a large infected part of the body and the infection has reached its nerve endings then it is necessary to close that and all inside where the infection has spread, and then cover it up with skin flap once it is healed.
I recommend you to take your patient in the operation theatre so that they are simply and simply assist over your surgery.
"A young man about 20 years old, who has pain in his chest area, and who the doctors suspect might have a heart attack.
"The doctors' mistake was in assuming the pain was caused by a heart attack and not checking for other possible causes like gout.
"The multiple doctors checked within two days but couldn't find the cause in that area and called for an expert.
"The body of that man was swollen and had a very red color.
"They tried to find out what caused it by looking at the swelling, but couldn't identify the cause.
"Then they tried to look for any other parts of his body that might be affected, but couldn't find anything.
"They tried to examine one of the affected areas but couldn't find any signs or symptoms in that area, and they found something abnormal in another part.
When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands
You have already prepared the opening between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
You now apply the restoration of the bladder with conservative medicine for a longer period, but it is not yet cured.
Now you gently spread and open the second part of the opening on top of the first one, and continue the corruption to both parts of the body.
You have already treated that infection and prepared for its cure and restoration, but it is not yet restored.
Now you gently spread and open the second part of the opening carefully one by one especially to perform its restoration, but it is not yet restored when you insert a finger in it, causing extra damage to its cord and nerves, and it will return medical care for that, returning it back into the cavity and performed another restoration.
You do not need to continue the operation and sectioning but for the disposition of the disease and its scarcity tolerance fear of death that it causes in all hours through excessive evacuation without interruption bad.
When he is sick and nothing else is available, then do the following: place it in his chest as well as returning to its rightness and goodness; then talk with him about what you can do for him so that there may be no harm done by any cause
If the first remedy is not available or effective in that location of the chest: then proceed with the following method. Stretch it out to its full extent using both hands, and make sure you have extended your arm as far as possible; pause for a moment, taking care not to let the skin tear from applying too much pressure, and cut away any excess flesh that does not need to be saved so that the cut will not harm what you want to be done.
Pause for a moment and make sure when doing this there is no prohibition on making the cut that does not harm spoiled meat.
Cut the incision carefully one part at a time, as if you are in the cavity of corruption and not on its surface; force to make sure that there is enough space between your fingers so that when you cut it will be done neatly.
If the meat is spoiled and not eminent, then make a continuous incision along it all the way through to where corruption enters or begins at its surface; pause for a moment, taking care that you do not cut yourself in the process; proceed with the cutting of the second part as well but only if corruption continues.
E it's a small lesion in the area of corruption after we said
And if corruption occurs at the joint, then attack that corrupted joint and strike out where it continues from another part
If corruption occurs in the continuation of two joints, then doctors are not looking for gout but rather inflammation.
If the corruption occurs in the hand or foot, it is difficult; but if you want to find out where the corruption lies and open that part, then address that part, and take advantage of any available opportunity to correct it, even though it may conflict with a vein or nerve.
The surgeons know which parts to attack and how to cut them, the preparation of those parts, their size, subtlety, grandeur, rarity of those parts, severity and rarity, in order that they may prepare all kinds of surgical equipment necessary for that operation.
The surgeons know what that operation means for the kind of instrument it requires; if you are great and long in your study and experience with instruments of this art, and witness the sufferings of maladies, then they may have given to you, by your request at this point where it is convenient for all instruments used for any malady.
"And in this final part of the chapter, you will list the instruments which you will use to execute these prohibitions and experiments on them. "The form should be such:
"Here's another form for you:
"Finally, here's a very long and complicated form:
"The first sentence to translate is as follows. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else: "The second sentence to translate from that paragraph is as follows. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
"The second sentence to translate from that paragraph is as follows. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
"The following sentence to translate is as follows. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
"Here's a very long form for you:
The following sentence to translate is as follows. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else: "Here's a very long form for you:
The following sentence to translate is as follows. Do not add any comments like 'here is the translation', just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Another method of treatment
Another method for straightening an arm.
Another way to cauterize (burn) a small area.
Another smaller incision
Another incision to make, like this one but on the other limb.  The cut is made so it lies flat and exhibits in different locations along the bone.
To slit that which fits into the ratio of that which is perforated through the bones.
The limb cut to be triangular and sharp edged.
It is customarily done with a pointed instrument, similar to all other incisions and burns.
The incision of the limb and the burning of the bones.
The extremities may be caused internally or externally, or depending on whether you want to heal that corruption with those medicines and the healing does not coincide, sometimes it means that there is a member which was not burned due to any cause, the doctor commands you to cut off that member into this manner so as to burn off the corruption in order for it to leave more damage to the body.
The only option is to cut it off completely when it has already been burned, or you may choose to burn the black part and leave the rest of that member which has burnt as if it were not there at all, therefore choose one method for incision
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and foot pain occurs, it is customarily called gout by doctors
If the corruption or strike occurs in the hand's extremity, then you should not spread it across and prevent contact with the mouth so that it does not enter into the body.
If you come to the mouth, then avoid spreading it across and prevent contact with the eyes so that it does not enter into the eye of the arm.
If you come to him/her, then cover the arms in the joint area.
If another corruption enters and kills the patient, then in that case it is death for the patient, and to administer another cause here would be futile.
When corruption enters into the foot's digit, then you should cover it with a finger of one hand.
If you come upon poison in the foot, then you cover all of the foot. When it comes to entering into the nostril, then you should cover the leg in the joint area of the nose.
If corruption has already entered into the nose, then that is death for the patient, and it should be reported to the doctors immediately.
"The servant is about to make a cut on the body part or sever it, as you stretch out the ligament at that location and another one over there; then extend a minister of linen at both ends so they are evenly spread across where the flesh has been opened up completely.
"After placing the cushion and minister of linen as described previously, you should prevent further contact with that location to avoid any further injury or pain.
"If an abscess occurs and you perform cautery on the affected area promptly or wait for some powders to harden it first? And after that, return to your medical treatment.
"Place a bandage over the damaged limb when necessary and treat it as soon as possible.
"I recommend you to extinguish the fire in that area where the accident occurred and is causing trouble for you.
"The corruption was first addressed by treating all of the body part.
"The man prepared himself to undergo medical treatment as quickly as possible for the pain and discomfort in that limb, and after cutting it open he treated it.
In those times, there was corruption in that particular matter of which I am speaking.
In order to mitigate that excess, I recommend spreading it over the surface of the body like a sort of ointment or cream, and also to control its spread through the matter by which you may already be familiar; if not, please specify another matter.
I recommend applying a poultice to the matter of which you are already familiar; however, if not, please specify another matter in order to prevent any further complications from that excess, as it seems there was an injury to one of its parts.
I have recommended that the excess be spread over the matter in which you are already familiar; however, if not, please specify another matter so as to prevent any further complications from that excess, as it seems there was an injury to one of its parts and it has been treated accordingly.
I did not include this story for the sake of assisting you with that matter of which you are already familiar, and its significance as well as in order to understand it further than what is already mentioned.
To cure your health issues, we recommend the use of medical remedies.
When the abscess occurs on any part of the body except for the anus itself, it is treated as follows: first, heat is applied to the area where the abscess develops in order to cause constriction and then incision is made around it in a circular motion with a thin blade, after which pus is removed and the abscess is broken up; finally, place your hand over it while applying a gentle pressure, so that you do not come into contact with any corruption or nerve tissue.
Fistula.
The treatment for it is to insert a dressing that completely covers the fistula whenever it becomes swollen and more significantly when it is being treated with drops, making sure not to adhere to the location of the fistula's corruption.
If you suspect that the dressing is adhering and that the fistula cannot be achieved due to any other reason, then the cure for it may be a clip.
The physician will consider it and if it is large, they may suggest a clip that can be applied to the dressing, which contains oil and vinegar ingredients that can neutralize any potential irritation or inflammation of the area around where the medication should be applied.
The physician will take it and mix the dressing with water and vinegar; then apply the dressing to the fistula, and squeeze out any excess fluid from it, and leave the medicine in for a duration of two hours.
Then remove that dressing after those days until it has become clear to the skin and relieved the odor.
Some dressings may contain water to help cleanse the area when you are not using this medication; and place them over it with water, then apply that dressing so as to make sure that your skin heals properly.
When the patient is not tolerant of Egyptian medicine or water, ulcers will be healed by giving him vinegar and honey mixture, so that his stomach may be moistened with it, adhering to it more than when there is too much stickiness and dryness in it.
And when you have done that and you feel its wounds are healed, the ulcers will be healed by applying water which is sweet to his skin.
It is necessary to add finely chopped, sweet and sticky oil mixed with vinegar or other medicines that have been mentioned in the book on digestion tracts.
If the vein of his arm is blocked and cannot be opened with the catheter, then it must be opened slowly step by step, and a pause should be made in which a bandaged tourniquet containing Egyptian or basilicon solution may be used to amplify its effect.
Similarly if the vein is large enough, you should increase the amount of the solution by adding layers and adjusting its quantity in such a way that the effect on the catheter increases.
If the vein of his arm has been raised to a level where it is easy for him to move and no longer in contact with the skin surface, then you should seal that opening so he cannot get into trouble when his arm gets caught on something because if the arm becomes entangled during your use the flesh will be injured.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout.
When you have placed another drape near the orifice of your body to increase its position's length while keeping some distance between them and applying pressure over that area, gradually stretch it further away from your body at a slower pace until it reaches its desired length. To determine if what happens to the intestine or hernia is mild or severe, you can try to pass gas and see if it causes pain in your feet.
After placing another drape near the orifice of your body while applying pressure over that area and gradually stretching it further away from your body at a slower pace until it reaches its desired length, you should consider if there is pain in the patient's location where they are sitting or not, as well as any discomfort.
When your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you apply it to the abdomen as previously mentioned, or if you prefer a more thorough application, after removing the bandage, remove the third dressing and wash the area gently with water
If the virus is very subtle, do not remove the adhesive of it, as its health care requires it, as those who have undergone this treatment report swelling and redness in their wounds, which may be contrary to your situation
If the adhesive is not working days after application, and if it's prolonged use that caused this situation, apply a solution of dried medicinal substances to it; as these medicines are dry in their substance and in their virtue, they will be effective when applied sparingly with drying power, once you have adjusted for excessive additions.
This may be the case when you apply it carefully and it becomes dry on its own, or if applied over a wet area, as well as applying to itself in its substance, use that one, and use it.
This may be the case when you are applying it and there is no adhesive on your hand, after removing it as soon as it becomes too thick, use that one; or if you prefer to try different ones and others, apply them all over the body where swelling occurs, and place a cloth soaked in something over the face, and put it on top of the affected area, and put that onto the affected part.
When you have opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate: You should apply these simple remedies, beat them thoroughly and powder them over the meal which I have recommended; and mix with it.
If the pain lasts or does not improve with this treatment, it means that inflammation is occurring in the preon of the body, and you should inquire about any bones or other hard parts of the body as well; the doctors call such pain fistular.
For treatment of hemorrhoids, apply these remedies to the anus and genitals separately using a sharp instrument for incision, sections, or cuts.
Hemorrhoids are a condition in which the anus is inflamed or sore, often causing pain to the fingers as well as other parts of the body; if it continues and its treatment is not improving, or becomes worse over time, you should seek medical attention immediately, or apply cautery to stop the inflammation.
And once you have divided the area and do not see improvement in your treatment, doctors recommend that you insert all of the excess fluid from the anus into a tube, which is heated with cautery to burn away the affected parts quickly.
When the urine is healthy and clear, the kidneys will be good, preventing kidney stones from forming, and when there are pains in them, the doctors usually use corrosive medicines to help it out.
When the urethra becomes infected, the doctors will usually prescribe antibiotics to treat it and relieve it as soon as possible.
If the corruption and inflammation occur in one of the nerves according to their memory, then the doctors will usually prescribe treatment for that nerve as soon as possible.
If the urethra is perforated or injured and it causes severe pain, then at first apply a warm compress to the area, and if that doesn't work, place an ice pack over it to reduce swelling.
When the patient is very weak and cannot get out of bed or move their limbs, they are in a critical condition.
The cause may be an inflammation of the joint itself or from external injuries to the nerves. When one of these is not in his bones (joints), he may suffer from gout.
For those who have cold humors entering the body, loosen up your joints and make them free to move around
If one of these is not in its place (joints), curing will be difficult; therefore guard them from being outside their place
If one of these is not in the right place (joints), loosen up its muscles and try to get it back into its correct position
If the cause of this is between the muscles themselves or due to external factors like burns, combustion, or friction, try to bring it back into its normal position
If the heat is too intense or excessive between these two strips of oil that may not be possible to consolidate them at once; separate them instead, or pause among them a thin layer of gauze until it has consolidated properly.
If consolidation is needed in the hand's joint, loosen up that joint and wait until it is prepared and comfortable with the body part's figure.
They are veins.
When veins become clogged with dark colored fluids causing pain in the limbs of the body, and particularly in the legs, and most commonly on the calves, and often in the thighs and forearms and hands
When administering purgative made of black bile to someone experiencing a severe headache, apply the patient's blood to the basilic vein.
The first method of treatment is to apply a compress soaked in cold water and black bile, while the second way is to elevate the patient's feet above his head and empty them completely.
The second method of treatment is to place the patient's feet above their head and empty them completely until the large vein becomes full again with feces. Then, tightly wrap it around their body in a certain location or multiple locations depending on how much you want to remove it from them each time they feel it, after which you can then lift it up high into the air while holding onto one end of it so that any excess fluid is removed and the vein's integrity is maintained.
And after this, command them to avoid consuming black bile inducing foods.
Repeat the treatment for phlebotomy when veins are already full and therefore causing pain in the patient.
"When the veins of the leg are swollen and inflamed from sitting for a long time, or if the limb is overworked due to strenuous exercise
"If you want to remove the clot from the right or left side of the leg, you can either apply heat or cold.
"You should try to apply pressure to the clot and keep it still to prevent further spread.
"When you feel that white, be careful; it may indicate an abscess or blood clot formation.
"Apply pressure to the vein in such a way that both ends are elevated and applied simultaneously.
"Apply pressure to the clot at three points: on top of it, below it and near your hand.
"Apply pressure to the clot at two points: below and above it.
"Place all of them in such a way that they are above or below the clot depending on which side it is.
"When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
"Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
"You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
"And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
"When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
"And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
The beginning of an incision in the groin
This vein is created in the thighs on both sides, as well as in the Arabic and Indian lands, where there is very little vegetation and sparse foliage.
And further more it is made on other parts of the body besides the thighs
The action of it is to putrefaction, which causes serpents and worms and ulcers and worms to sprout between the incision and the flesh.
The anticipation of its appearance is that the vein will suddenly become inflamed, and it is necessary to cover over it, then cauterize it with a pointed cautery to prevent it from coming out like a plant shoot.
As soon as it appears, make sure to cover it with a patch of lead which weighs about one drachma, until you catch it and remove the lead patch from the thigh.
And whenever there is any cause to be done elsewhere on the body, wrap it in lead and catch that one. If it prolongates then you should cut out one part of the vein and wrap around its circumference; but if there is no other place where to go, just wrap that one tightly into the flesh and cause blisters and sores in the area and bad ulcers.
For when the treatment is being applied smoothly with gentle pressure, so that it does not come off from the fingers of the practitioner and falls on nothing in the body
And that vein, as it enters into the hollow of the palm of the hand and the thumb, has also been applied to me where I have felt one of them.
If the treatment is done in a timely manner during its application, it will enter through his veins and perforate that vein to come out of the body into the matter, so as long as this occurs, do not administer putrefaction for days on medication; and then cure it with the care of stitches.
That vein of the hollows is very small and often causes harm when it approaches the junction of the foot or leg, and comes out from it ruthlessly, so that you can identify which vein it is
Then cure this in such a way as to divide into the division mentioned above.
From under the cow's buttocks and is called bovine itch.
This disease is called bovine itch when it occurs in any country and does not occur with the cattle fever that appears between the bone and the flesh, it spreads throughout the body itches and scabs, and is displayed by the feeling of itching on every member to member until he breaks down the bones and falls.
The generation of this occurs due to putrefaction of certain humors, which also causes worms and lice in the belly
It is feared for the malice of this, because when he enters the body and is raised to his head, and then gets lost in it, the sores are inflamed by him and inside and destroyed, which eventually leads to death.
When you want to heal him and remove it, then doctors cannot be done without the help of a surgeon's assistant and appearance in front of him, so that you can hold onto what is on top of him and what is below him firmly, and make sure about him and get rid of it.
If it is stuck in the flesh and you can't find it, then doctors take a cautery with fire on the location where it is located, which is one of the major causes that are feared to be corruption of the place, as well as the corruption causing its spread.
If it ever gets stuck in the head due to its location near the heat, then doctors tighten over the upper lip firmly and make sure about him, and get rid of it; also use medicine to eliminate bad humors causing illness from his body, and keep an eye on the generation of putrefaction.
The patient should lie flat.
This illness is not common in our land, and the pain which occurs in all members of the body, and it spreads from one member to another.
I see that you want recommendations for a second time. I recommended a female patient to a town, and after checking her arm vein for swelling, it turned out that she had one on the wrist as well.
And since then, there was pain in this location and a swelling developed in the muscle, so I applied heat for one hour.
Then I checked her other arm to see if it had swollen as well.
I recommended moving her body in all directions except for the arm that was swollen, to prevent further swelling and rapid spreading from one part of the body to another. You have already seen that when it comes to changing the position of this body part, you must be careful not to move other parts quickly from one to another. I saw her in this condition as well.
I didn't think of that until after finding out the female patient had swelling in both legs and veins exposed as well, which showed a spreading sensation to be possible.
It's important to prevent re-curvature in those who have a delicious and agreeable curvature of the veins, such as hemorrhoids.
If you want to perform an incision on the patient in order to correct their curvature and alleviate their pain, then do not make it look like this as I have described; rather, stay focused on that area and apply heat there until the contracted part is relaxed, and cauterize the affected area.
If you are not able to perform the procedure at home, then you should go to a doctor and ask for tablets that can expel intestinal worms or pills of serpents, as well as other such remedies.
Extract from hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are diverse depending on the location and type, for example those that have large points or small ones, thick ones or thin ones, or concave ones or flat ones, they are solid; similarly those with three angles or those who have lips, and those which have stars.
When the snake enters the body and bites the eye, it causes swelling of the eyelid, vision loss, dizziness, and burning in the hands, mouth, throat, and stomach; numbness, confusion, and vomiting from thoughtlessness occur as well.
If you find this snake, then get rid of its venom and remove the source if necessary
When the snake enters the body and goes to the breast, it is a cause of severe pain that does not subside; the sudden tightening of the muscles of the limb resembles that of a stroke, and death may follow shortly thereafter.
When the snake enters the lungs it causes frothy sputum to come from the throat, and the veins of the chest are filled with blood; the face becomes reddened and painful breathing is greatly obstructed
If the snake enters the small intestine near the chest, and pain occurs in the small ribs, then severe burning pain and heavy breathing occur; the muscles of all limbs become paralyzed.
When a stomachache occurs in an empty stomach, pains from undigested food are customary
If the stomach is empty and it is placed on the abdomen, then there will be no opening of the intestine or hernia, nor any tearing of the tissue, unless a pointed cautery is made to open up the stomach
If the bladder is empty and there is no outlet for urine, then severe pain occurs over the abdomen, and it is customary to call this colic by doctors.
The other members of the body are as follows: face, neck, groin, legs and buttocks, spine, ribs, sacrum, and iliac bones, which serve as secondaries when the stomach does not open into a vein or artery, nor is it venomous.
In summary, if you have read this carefully and understand the instructions here given, then indicate your agreement with that statement.
The cause of which is, when there is stomach acid in the lacrimal duct of the nose and it reaches that other part of the body, then it escapes from its own outlet, tears come out of the eyes of the patient, but not through the nose.
When the ulcer is in the gray of his eye, do not let it protrude beyond that point; cover it with a small cushion so that only part of it adheres to its fold and is covered by a large cushion made up of sharp cushions from the Turks
After that, do not rub or scratch in any way
After that, apply a small cushion over it to cover the ulcer and prevent further irritation.
After removing the cushion from over it, ensure that nothing is rubbed or scratched on it, and do not scratch accidentally as well.
After removing the cushion from over it and ensuring nothing is rubbed or scratched on it, apply a bandage over it to secure it in place and prevent any further irritation.
After removing the cushion from over it and ensuring nothing is rubbed or scratched on it, apply a bandage to secure it in place while preventing any further irritation due to natural body functions.
There is another man who, when he puts his face and settles on it, the flesh and blood run out of him without pain, and it's similar to this one.
The face of the man who was captured in his own place near the nose had already declined to the right side for a little while and was now completely hidden by it.
They called on him for three days of care in order to remove the flesh from his face.
And when they tried to remove the flesh from his face but couldn't, and when they inquired into that gently, without feeling it, maybe it was on the right side of the forehead; or perhaps there was another pain in the area near the ear.
They opened the place in which there is truth and digestion, making sure that this place matches with where it happens on his face, to prevent any mistakes or false ideas about its location.
They didn't accuse the place of causing the pain to his face; they continued to put their hand on it for several days and not accused any accident, but carefully placed the flesh covering between them as well.
When there is an acute corrosive medicine applied to the wound in days to come and after which it burns, also put on a bandage of a subtle kind that adheres firmly
Put on the bandage tightly in the area of the wound where the corrosive medicine is applied and after that period has passed cover with times to prevent the area from getting infected for four months.
Put on the burn with increased fire and cover it with gauze, remove that and do not leave any excess, keep applying a thin bandage gently and carefully in that manner until you reach the end of your treatment days, at which point you will remove that bandage.
Doctors judge that the nose cartilage is not restored and you will restore it along with the burn scar and ensure their health is maintained and do nothing else in any way.
I recommend to you the quality of extracting some bones in order that it may stop this rule and significance as is stated here that was not said, for the parts of this art and definitions of that are not comprehended by narration or do not comprehend those from free
Compare the arts that are few in number with those that exist, and the one that is absent compared to the one that is present, and remove any external causes of the art when it occurs.
When joints are afflicted with gout, then the pain occurs in two places: either due to a restriction of movement at that location or by the opposite side.
The one that happens on the side where it was restricted will be painful and swollen; or if there is another pain occurring in a different location as well
If it is not urgent to have the pain resolved within a certain timeframe that may cause tissue damage or if there is no more space for the organ to expand its area (e.g., in the abdomen), then the physician will suggest waiting and observing the situation, with the aim of allowing the organ to adapt itself to the new location as much as possible.
In such cases, if the pain is in the legs and there is not urgent need for immediate intervention, doctors will suggest allowing time to pass while keeping an eye on the situation, so that the organ can adapt itself as much as possible to the new location over a certain period of days; but ultimately it may become swollen.
If the pain is not urgent and doctors have determined that it may take some time for the organ to adapt itself to its new location while the size of the organ grows gradually over a certain period of days, then they will suggest performing tests in order to follow how the organ's behavior changes as it adapts.
If the sack is already fixed in that location of the body and also on the feelings area, doctors will examine it thoroughly, and if you feel it there, they will consider removing it from where it is inconvenient for its attachment to the body part.
If you cannot stretch the ligament or the length of the protrusion and there is no nerve nor vein present in it, doctors will seek to expand it and remove the sack if that's possible.
If the sack is completely fixed on all the parts that you want to stretch, doctors will remove the skin from those areas and consider surgery if stretching it isn't possible because of fractures or twists in those parts where it overlaps.
When you remove the sack in any location, doctors will use sharp forceps to cut all parts into which it is necessary and delicately handle them so that the sack does not get torn or broken and can be easily removed from its attachment area.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. If there is an external blockage causing discomfort, the doctor recommends applying pressure in the affected area to alleviate it.
If the discomfort is due to a blocked vein or nerve, or from the heart itself, apply gentle pressure on any point around it as recommended by doctors to promote relief and comfort.
Once you have located the blockage, follow the instructions to ensure that the patient remains comfortable and safe while allowing medical personnel to take control of the situation as soon as possible. If this is not applicable, please proceed with steps indicated for that particular case.
If the pain is caused by an external blockage that affects another part of the body or if you suspect there may be internal damage causing pain, proceed with caution and ensure all necessary precautions are taken to protect the patient from further harm while taking care not to cause any additional injury.
If the pain is caused by a swelling in the mouth that prevents it from closing properly or if you suspect there may be internal damage causing pain, apply pressure to stop the bleeding and increase circulation while keeping an eye on the patient for any other issues.
And unless
And if the fist of the patient is in that
And if the fist is cut and you want to administer resuscitation, then hold that in your hand until the cavity of the body aligns with the chest and apply it
And if the chest is concave, then hold that in your hand tightly until the cavity matches up with it, so the chest has been widened by it.
And if the chest is expanded, then you should fill up all of the skin in that area as much as possible while still being within your limits, and place it where it can be used to further expand it.
And if the chest is in your stomach, or in your belly, or in your bladder, or on one of its sides, and it is close to where you touch it, then remove that from there and save it for later use, put a bandage over that and guard against any vein or nerve damage, stretch it out, and apply it onto the injury.
Use of the type of forceps indicated here to remove the chest.
And when holding onto one side of it, do not let go until you feel that it is secure and fixed to the chest.
When the humors of cold are many and large, after the quantity of its greatness and its smallness, and the width of its channel, and the limitation of it.
This way will make the interior of its cavity more relaxed and stimulate it to constrict that extremity.
Vein stripping procedure.
The veins of phlebotomy to be used for vein stripping should come from the sixth intercostal space, and these are usually located on both temples at the base of the nose. They also enter into the eyelids as small vessels that are called aspicientz; a larger vessel is prepared in front, one at the top of the nose, another below, and they go to the chin, inside the mouth, inside the lower lip, inside the upper lip, and there are two veins located on either side of the tongue. The veins used for phlebotomy should come from the forehead region (cephalica), and are composed of a branch from the basilica and another from the cephalica; it is called "the great vein" or "main artery," which is obstructed in domestic veins as indicated earlier, so it is known by its name "fistular"; and there are other smaller branches that enter into the fistula region near the ear.
The first vein in the thigh is called the femoral vein and is responsible for bending the knee of wild animals; the second one is saphenous, its location being between the domestic veins that run from it to the sciatic nerve on the back of the leg.
The youthful veins are most likely varicose veins that come with age and become more pronounced over time, accompanied by pain in the head area or old ulcers.
The quality of the pain suggests that these are probably migraines, which often cause the veins on top of the head to become engorged with blood and swell up; you should lie down in a darkened room or try putting your feet up for example.
To perform an abdominoplasty, the surgeon will make a small incision in the lower abdomen and remove excess skin and fat from there to eliminate bulges or rolls of fat that protrude through the belly button. To elevate your hand and the arm above the vein and elbow, make an incision for surgery near where you want it to happen (in this case at the upper arm). The length of the incision is adjusted according to how much skin and fat you want removed, or near where you wish it would happen (in this case, upper arm).
When you have put a cushion beneath their thighs, place another servant on their legs, and one more on their chest while holding their hands.
And then proceed to make the incision of those and apply the cautery.
The arteries that come to the surface of the veins, are called superficial veins and are commonly related to the formation of varicose ulcers or chronic swelling on the limbs.
The quality of phlebotomizing those is to recommend it, as you must constrain the patient's arm so that they can feel both arms moving and demonstrate their own.
You elevate the cannula above the vein and place it in your hand as indicated, insert it into the phlebotomy incision on their arm, and lift the vein up to them. If you want to access both veins simultaneously, do so by making a point over each of the veins separately; and make sure not to rush while ensuring safety is maintained during this process.
After restraining the patient's arm and placing a cushion beneath their thighs for one hour, then place a cushion under both buttocks and tighten that to restrict blood flow as much as possible, ensuring it is secure before making an incision in between them.
After recalling their name and the location of those, make a cut into that area as soon as possible.
"The first aid for the bleeding from the forehead is to apply pressure, and then move it over to the bleeding coming out of the nose.
The quality of the bleeding is to recommend another thing, this is that the patient should hold something into which the blood can flow. And please provide me with the instrument's name for which this method is called: a tourniquet
Stop the tourniquet at a point just above the bleeding area on that vein and tighten it in such a way as to slow or stop the bleeding, allowing enough time for medical assistance if needed; and then apply pressure over the wound until the patient is attended by medical personnel.
Some cauterization is done at the bleeding point itself, but not every cauterization should be like that of an acute extremity, as it would damage the tissue and may cause necrosis in the area if not done carefully.
Put pressure on both tear ducts to stop the bleeding and then apply it over the face wounds.
The quality of bleeding is that the patient should hold something into which the blood can flow and then apply pressure over it.
When the incision is made at an angle and only a few millimeters in length, it occurs near the location where skin does not exist; if the phlebotomy is subtle, very lightly touch your fingertips may be severed.
When it's necessary to do so, pause on those things and stretch them gently; afterwards, you may remove the bandage.
The phlebotomy of the nasal vein is accompanied by an acute fever and chills, and also affects the face and scalp more frequently; it is commonly called "facial" when it occurs suddenly.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient feels pain in their chest and wants to have their nose held by their left hand; then gently perform it near the nasal septum where the vein cannot be felt here, but as soon as possible so that it starts flowing rapidly.
After having performed the phlebotomy gently and as needed, you should place it back in its original position to restore circulation immediately.
The phlebotomy of the veins can cause constriction, leprosy (Hansen's disease), and other diseases such as ergotism or ulcers from corrosive substances like mercury.
The quality of the phlebotomy on those is that the patient feels pain in their chest and also causes severe swelling over their head and a sensation as if it were around one's neck.
This is an instruction for performing an operation on the patient, specifically on their legs or chest. The surgeon will use a cushion to elevate the leg (or chest) and perform each incision gradually starting from one side of the body towards the other.
The surgeon is to apply a ligature (tie) around the limb or chest and tighten it to prevent blood from flowing out of the incision while the wound heals.
The surgeon is to perform an operation on the veins of the groin as well, including the application of small sutures and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and also those that occur in the nose or throat area
The quality of the operation required is that it will cause pain to the patient while tightening the knot and pulling on the arm, and make sure you tie a ligature around each vein separately - one from the right side of the labia and another from the left side; and show this by cutting through both sides at once.
If you are unsure which vein it is or cannot find the one that should be cut through, then proceed to make an incision into the largest of those veins and the most prominent one.
When you are performing a surgical procedure on someone who has an abdominal hernia, make sure to put something soft between their thighs in order to prevent any injury.
The surgeon should indicate the two veins that are located in the vestibule of the vulva/labia major, as well as those found at the lower part of the nose, larynx, and mouth.
The quality of phlebotomy is to follow the vein closely between your fingers and lift up on it, while watching the other veins as well, noting which one has become darker in color.
Once you have phlebotomized each of them and keep track that none of the veins you used are arteries.
The veins you have phlebotomized in the wrist are located on those of most people and the phlebotomy procedure is repeated every two months or at intervals that may vary slightly depending on individual needs. You may choose to perform superficial phlebotomy using a needle with a small gauge, or if necessary, cuttlebone phlebotomy by removing some skin tissue.
The veins are opened once more, and those that contain large obstructions are separated
This phlebotomy procedure is of lesser latitude and more subtle extremity, and it involves the phlebotomy of veins that contain subtle citric substances.
The phlebotomy procedure is carried out on the vein called the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: four extremities have a blockage that causes leg swelling and pain in the abdomen
The phlebotomist, upon performing the phlebotomy of that vein, should ensure it is straight and adjust it according to puncturing technique to prevent bleeding and arterial injury, so as not to harm the vein's flow and cause pain.
If the basilica is not visible for puncturing inspection, then you should move to another vein or seek help from someone else; if puncturing at that location causes pain, then proceed with the procedure on a different vein as requested.
If you want to perform the phlebotomy on that arm, hold the hand flat and place it as directed; adjust its position so that the artery is pressed in the area for phlebotomy procedure as requested; and ensure that the blow does not hit any of the artery's spaces.
When you inflate the bladder with strong air pressure, it causes an inflammation in the area where you have inserted the tube, causing a pain there
If you perform a phlebotomy with air from an infant and the needle is too small, the pain will be felt in the artery; do not worry about that as long as it does not cause bleeding, hold tight the band around that to prevent it from coming out; otherwise, squeeze tightly the other hand
Hold the patient's mouth open and hold their head so that they do not move; otherwise, they might vomit during those days when they are sick.
If the artery is not blocked and you need to inject medicine into it, take note of where it is; if your extremity is closed up or the artery is blocked, squeeze tightly that hand around the vein in order to prevent bleeding; otherwise, place a tourniquet on that arm or leg immediately.
If the artery is blocked, be it; otherwise, remember where that was mentioned previously for the purpose of remembering where to apply pressure in case of bleeding.
It is difficult to perform a phlebotomy on small extremities and the possibility of damaging your hand.
The veins swelling up the face is usually caused by the removal of the sac from the top and bottom of the head, as well as from the heart.
The vein swelling on the face is often caused by a temporary fever in the vein removal, which makes it one of the nerves; and once you have cut into the vein, it will cause paralysis or numbness if not done properly, making it difficult to recover, and in some cases may even be fatal.
If a vein is between two nerves, you should cut the vein at its length.
The beginning of the process is to remove the sac from the top and bottom of the head, as well as from the heart, in order to treat swelling veins on the face.
In this case if you want to remove only the swelling veins or the deep veins, as opposed to removing both arteries and nerves, it is important that all other veins are saved, including the arteries.
When it is very painful in the first blow, when there isn't a relieving touch during the initial strike, then do not hit that spot again.
The first one is when you know that bleeding has been avoided but only by preserving health and preventing further injuries, and with caution in order to prevent accidents: cephalic, femoral, and basilar veins; the second one starts from a certain vein (not mentioned)
The third one or after the first hour has passed
Bleeding may be administered when it is necessary and convenient to do so, whether during the day or at night, in every hour and all times.
It is said that when there has been bleeding for more than 14 days or if it was not done within the fourth month after surgery and in any other cases where it had already passed seven months, then the veins should be avoided unless they have already healed for 14 years.
If bleeding is to be avoided for any reason that might make the veins swell up during the cautery procedure if there are wounds already present in them, so that the veins do not carry out their function of carrying away impurities from the cautery on the veins, which are pure, and should never affect the principal members.
"The patient should remain in a supine position and have cushions placed under their thighs, legs, chest, and hands to prevent any leakage or spillage of fluids from the body.
"Take into consideration that if the pain is severe and accompanied by fever, vomiting, or other symptoms, then medical treatment may also be necessary.
"There should not be any prohibition of exercise for the sake of keeping the pain under control.
"The application of a pointed cautery to the foot should be done at this time and no sooner.
"You should ensure that the patient's chest is protected against any animal accidents or bodily injuries.
"The causes that are used by men to increase their ability in smelling, taste, and appearance should be present.
"Follow the cautery operator's instructions on how to apply it correctly.
"Extend the patient's arms and have the cautery operator place it on their forehead, and then apply a second band around their neck.
When a sudden stiffness occurs that is not accompanied by pain or is excessive in its severity, doctors prohibit the passage of blood to it; or when it happens from excess heat, doctors prohibit circulation in the affected part altogether.
To treat a stiffness that has become flabby and swollen veins between its extremities enter, place poultices there to draw out the swelling; declare it to be inflamed.
Treat the flabby and swollen veins with a poultice gently applied to that vein for a short time in order to prevent blood from flowing out of it quickly, or else apply pressure over the area where the treatment is being performed so as not to allow any escaping; if there is leakage, place the poultice on top of it.
Therefore, when the poultice has been applied and remains in place due to these causes.
When removing the poultice, if a vein has burst through in this manner, then the doctor will declare it to be broken; otherwise, make another application of pressure over that area for a short time or at its base as needed.
When the space is opened and the patient coughs or sneezes, you should give her a drink either one day or two, not to strain too much as it may cause pain in the abdomen, nor should be inserted if inserted
If an abscess is present
If the opening is small and can be gently stretched without causing too much tension, then you should perform a fistula by making an incision in that area and adjusting it so as to fit into the patient's anus, but if not then only make a tiny hole in case the space is opened.
If that already exists then do not perform another one as it would cause unnecessary harm to the patient's anus and may result in damage to their intestines. It is better here than anywhere else.
It is better to make an incision for oil drainage in all fistula operations where the veins are blocked and they perform this type of surgery when it is stopped by one of those in that location because the abscess is very small and turns around when it becomes large.
If the abscess is large and you want to drain it, then make a small incision in that location, place your hand over the opening with salt water for one hour until it dissolves.
When you have inserted it into the appropriate vein of that arm or another, do this:
If there is any redness or greenness in that location, do nothing about it; and if you want to, pause over whatever reason or cause of concern or worry, or a reason for any disease or ailment or similar thing
If it has been diagnosed with bubonic plague by the priest
Then place your hand over it and if the pain increases do not remove the compress but keep it, as that bad omen is evil; and remember to pause over any cause of this matter as a very bad thing may happen to the artery
Place a plaster over it so that the location will harden and place another bandage next to it in case of bleeding; and if necessary apply another remedy nearby.
Take out the sick from completely healthy, based on their strength and color.
If the sick is black, you should remove it from what is healthy; and similarly if they are gross, you should remove them to make subtle; and similarly if sharp, you should remove them to keep sharpness.
If it is thick and strong, you need to remove the sick from a vein in order to amplify the plague in both veins; and the flea bomb would be widened accordingly.
In that case where it is cold, do you mean to say contrary to that? And by whom or what was it extracted in warm weather and how it arrived
The doctor who administers phlebotomy for treatment of vein inflammation is the one who makes a transverse incision but not a puncture.
This phlebotomy method is used to prevent the flow of blood and injury to nerves, it should be performed at right angles or at right angles.
When administering phlebotomy without interruption you should: infuse saline solution or oxygen through a small cannula, extract the vein in three veins or four.
If the phlebotomy is performed in a cold environment, you should administer the solution through a warm cannula or an aromatic one, such as peppermint, cinnamon, ginger, etc., or a scented and non-fragrant one.
If phlebotomy is interrupted due to a sudden change in body temperature, the doctor should administer water from the patient's blood and an aromatic solution, and use the latter for inhalation, keeping his own nose covered with something.
Use the following causes mentioned in the chapter on phlebotomy to prevent interruptions:
When the first vein is opened and dissolved from the second one onwards, as you reach it, the bleeding will cease, and the wound will heal quickly over time, in proportion to the amount of blood lost.
When the first vein is opened and dissolved from the second onwards, as you continue doing so, the pain will eventually cease or diminish over time.
When you aim to remove the wound from the chest side opposite of where it first appeared, and it continues for two or three days.
If the wound is already infected with a fever and begins to cause serious problems (like pain that won't stop or even death), then you should try to remove it immediately, as fast as possible, making sure to keep all the conditions of bleeding under control; place your hand over its location on the chest in order to prevent blood loss from causing further harm. If not handled properly by a professional who knows what they are doing (as this would indicate ignorance or negligence), then you should seek immediate medical help immediately and have the wound removed as fast as possible with all the conditions of bleeding under control at that point.
And when you want to remove the second vein and evacuate the wound, but already have closed off some veins and find it difficult to remove the wound, make sure you put extra effort into it and stretch out its removal for as long as possible, as this is too bad a situation.
When the vein is congested due to phlebotomy and coagulation occurs in the extremities of the vein, or when it is necessary to tourniquet the veins, either for varicose veins or to control bleeding, place a cushion under them both
If the vein has been closed (venous thrombosis), then lie on that and do not touch it to prevent further blood clots
If there is a need to evacuate the vein (second time), and it is not an excuse, lie on that side or in another arm or another vein.
If the vein is blocked in the arm (ulnar vein), or in the forearm (brachial vein) when it was not ligated or ligated and closed, then it consists of those veins.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that it causes the patient to place their hand in a puddle or water puddle, and for the veins to appear prominently.
Then tighten around that in a very tight bandage, not making it too loose or not tight enough, and phlebotomize the second time by transecting the small vein, not transversely nor longitudinally.
Then make a large opening and your phlebotomy at which you phlebotomize that on the small joint of the hand.
When one is prohibited from drinking alcohol due to medical reasons, the doctors are advised to place a cushion under their buttocks and another servant on their legs so that the patient does not urinate in water while trying to fulfill his need.
If you are in the hot days of summer, the doctor is excused from performing the action described in the previous sentence and instead puts a cushion under the patient's buttocks to prevent urination while he tries to fulfill his need
The phlebotomy of this vein is saved when all the other veins are, except for one that does not have a pulse or nerve.
Phlebotomy of the right arm vein is considered a medical procedure.
The quality of phlebotomy is that you should stretch the arm or place your hand in cold water, so that the vein swells and becomes visible at once; and it's recommended to perform a transverse phlebotomy if possible; but otherwise, do not use this method.
Do not apply any ointment or medication to the arm after phlebotomy as it may damage the nerves exposed due to skin removal.
Place the hand in cold water and let the patient urinate into that; otherwise, if you do not perform this action, urination will occur inside the body and is prohibited from flowing.
When the second incision is made according to the quantity of necessity, then you are to place your hand over the vein and hold it, so that it may not be closed suddenly; and similarly do as I have instructed in all other parts of the body.
The treatment for this type of mutilation is to confer on the ulcers that are related to it.
You do as you have instructed in other wounds.
The veins of the phlegm and the ulcers related to it are those that appear on the part of the body, as well as other ulcers from older varicose veins, and similar ones from old sores and ancient ulcers.
The quality of the phlegm wound is that the patient's feet swell up and spread over it, and there are ulcers on the junction between the foot and the ground; also, its location in the vein shows a certain prominence, which spreads out in the shape of a fan from the leg towards the foot.
Then phlegm wound has an extensive area of damage to it, and that is the most serious one.
If the phlegm wound is on the surface of the foot then you are to hold back any nerves that may be caused by it over the surface of the foot and pause your phlegm wound incision where you want it.
Upon opening
Do not allow the intestine to protrude from its cavity, and if necessary, place a cushion under them so that they cannot fall out
If the first servant in the first place fails to hold or if you are not satisfied with them, then replace them quickly so that they remain secure; and do not worry too much about it as I mentioned earlier.
Similarly, follow the procedure for another servant.
For the sciatic vein, place it in a cavity of the other leg as I mentioned earlier.
The moment that the first servant is removed must be when you are about to remove the second one.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that it will hurt and be painful to squeeze out through a narrow space between your four fingers as well, which may not appear unless you do so.
Therefore when it is visible, the second servant will be phlebotomized as soon as possible and thereafter, if you decide to remove it through incision or excision, because its place remains safe.
And if you happen to miss it or do not feel the pain of removing anything else, then leave that alone and proceed with the other servant on your two legs in order from ear to nose
"Protect yourself from nerves; do as much running away that you want.
"Then open the strip and place it over the area of a phlebotomy cut; stretch it gently so that it is comfortable.
"With respect to the use of those tools.
"They are used for gout or ulcers, veins or hemorrhoids.
"The first one is used for scraping and removing sores, the other one is used for puncturing.
"The second one that is puncture is also known as a scalpel or scissors.
"The needles used for administration of sores are in these locations on the body: one is at the back of the head and another at the navel.
"The needles do not extract the sores but from small veins in the skin, so that they don't harm it by accident as when phlebotomy is done; nor should the needle be used if there are no injuries to treat.
When it is necessary to treat the patient's anal area or for continuous use, we must apply it at the beginning and end of each month and in intervals of time as needed.
And when such a cause arises at any time, especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command to apply the poultice immediately after passing three days or three hours.
Immediately after applying the poultice to the neck, if that brings about gravity in the head and to this extent it has affected the limbs: may such a poultice be applied as soon as possible all over the body.
This poultice is applied on the place of the head-laceration.
When the complicated cold humors infiltrate or when there is a great effusion in it (the body), then pain occurs and doctors are accustomed to calling this gout.
And do not use those vessels that cause the ailments to which I referred earlier.
In order to prevent the obstruction that you referred to earlier, and for this reason it is advisable to command your attendant to place her hand gently over the ventilator's face, so that she may prevent the generation of oblivion.
The ventilator should be placed in the area of the jugular vein and the basilica (ear), so that it may correct the asthma, constriction of the ear and the rupture of the ear drum, as well as the nose and throat.
And it is advisable to gently place the ventilator in a position where if stopped, it will cause weakness of the body and stomach.
The ventilator should correct the pain in the head and hearing, inflammation of the eye, blindness, burning of the eye, as well as the pain in the teeth areas; it is placed at the jugular vein location.
And it is advisable to command the attendant not to place her hand gently on top, so that she may not cause a rupture and the flow of blood.
Open the mouth of the patient and put in a cloth soaked with a mild corrosive to clean it; remove any corrosion from the gums, tongue, and all sores that may be there on the inside of the lips and any ulcers on the outside of both cheeks.
The treatment for cleansing is as follows: apply a cloth soaked in mild corrosive to the upper and lower lips, which will be done by way of heat application.
The treatment for cleansing the face boils down to three steps: first apply heat to the basilica artery and the cephalic veins; second, cauterize the jugular vein; third, cauterize all other smaller veins that may have infiltrated into the skin around them.
The attendant is to avoid scarring and ensure all nerves and arteries are intact.
It is a procedure used in the cleansing of hemorrhoids or ulcers that occur around the anus, to say nothing about any other parts.
The attendant should ask the cleanser to make a large procedure, meaning one that requires a lot of time and effort. The assistant must also ensure that all small veins are cauterized during this procedure as well.
The attendant should apply the cleansing procedure to all small veins one by one, making sure that each sore is treated individually and removing any old or new sores from the anus, groin, vulva, breasts, abdomen, thighs, and calves.
In this phrase there are two verbs in a similar order as each other but opposite meaning. The first verb means to cut, while the second is to open or begin.
This phrase literally translates to "and from the openings of the veins take a step towards the openings of two legs." However, I believe it's referring to venipuncture or blood-drawing procedure used in medicine where a needle is inserted into a vein for drawing out blood sample.
The quality of the position of the veins is that pauses at first to come and draws quickly for a short time, but do not prolong the position of the veins, may pause those temporarily, and remain those slightly, so that the humors go where they are accustomed to going. Do not cease repeating this and continue inside until you see it become rigid and inflated, so that the rope's knot loosens.
The pains of your joints are caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body and pain occurs in the feet.
For him who is prone to rash skin, do not scratch suddenly and without preparation, for fear that the location will be inflamed.
The phlebotomist commands the needle to increase the scratching a little bit, and always keep the procedure easy.
If the vein is narrow, then scratch two needles one at a time so that on the first needle you go through lightly to the center of it and from there proceed gently as well. In the second, an examination of the exterior of the large intestine
If the bowels are constipated, then let doctors administer laxatives to make them defecate properly
Also when we want to extract the bowel slightly or little by little, he administers one
If we want to extract the large intestine, he will administer a more powerful laxative; and if it is necessary that the bowel be very large, doctors prescribe stronger laxatives.
The term for cautery in which depth of incision only matters.
If the bowel is thick, hard, and filled with pus or other foul substances that cause great pain when it bursts, then doctors use cautery to cut open the bowels at once, without hesitation, whether in summer or winter, spring or autumn, early or late, or at dawn, dusk, midday, evening, night; they do this as a last resort.
If the excess is thick and rancid, doctors will use cautery to cut it open; or if there are other foul substances that cause great pain when they burst, they do this as well.
If the knife used is of good quality and strong enough to cut through tough meat, then doctors prohibit using it, so that when these incisions are made they can be washed with hot water or cold water, fresh from a well or a fountain, or cold water from a pond or a lake, and those like them.
When someone has a cold that causes mucus to be discharged from their nose, the servant should blow gently on it or water with vinegar and salt, as follows:
For someone who has thick mucus discharge, the servant should blow gently on it or water with vinegar and salt as follows:
The servant should keep the nasal passages open by using a bandage and administer it with the recommended amount of ointment or syrup for one to two hours, after which they should rest their nostrils.
What is required to regulate the nasal passages before a bloodletting procedure?
When considering the beginning: if you suspect that the bloodletting procedure is causing pain and inflammation in the nose, then you should check for causes of coldness, such as chilblains, and also apply vinegar, salt water, or other remedies to soothe the affected area.
After applying these remedies as well: pause your wine, and make sure that you're using cold water instead of hot water, and apply the following mixtures for sores on wounds, such as:
For someone who has a feverish complaint: you should drink barley water (eyssarop), or eye-sore of the many kinds mentioned before, salt, and vinegar which smells like garlic between day and night; also, make sure to decrease the amount of food and drink, and pause the wine consumption with a servant's suggestion.
"In the day of vomiting and bleeding, drink more water than usual.
"If someone is given a drink of tyriac acid or mucilage when they vomit and bleed, either to soothe the pain, calm them down, prevent them from panicking, or to help with vomiting or bleeding itself.
"The pain of vomiting will be less severe than the pain of stopping it if you pause for a while before applying any treatment to prevent scarring on the skin.
"It is not advisable to do so for those same reasons as mentioned before: to prevent scarring on the skin.
"When you sneeze or cough, hold your breath to prevent sneezing and coughing too hard.
"In the same way when holding in vomit and bile at those moments.
"The vomiting is treated with a gentle fluid, and some medicines are applied at high temperatures.
In full, that first sentence translates to: "In the groin, a treatment has been applied completely wet.
That means: "It is necessary for the abscess to be filled and full, either with pure water or with a solution that contains herbs suitable for this purpose.
The manner of administering the treatment: first determine the diameter that will be used for inserting it (the size of two fingers), then apply a measured amount to one palm; and lastly in the last place where the abscess is located, apply a smaller quantity equivalent to the tip of a needle.
The remedy should be applied in such a way that it does not prevent the member from being in its proper position on top of it.
It may be applied across the abdomen or to the back, and should be done with a steady flame at its source.
That treatment is of the greater kind than that which we recommended, and should be applied with a small amount from that place onto other abscesses or to its current location.
The ointments of the earlier type and the more powerful ones should be used only for young people or those with large abscesses.
The quality of applying the treatment with a steady flame at its source over the member is to extend it slightly by burning it gently while holding down only one candle of wax, and then apply it over the abscess in the transverse vein area so that the flame may be extinguished without burning through the patient's chest.
When the space between a patient's thighs is open, place it over their chest and say that you will now administer a powder to stop any breathing that occurs as soon as the wind enters through that opening, until which time?
Place your hand over their chest after you have opened the space between their thighs, and let them know to expect whatever else may follow that
The powder to be administered is meant for breathing relief and has no transverse or opening passages within it; the powder should only be poured into their chest cavity.
The form of this is as follows: And with larger quantities come the better results because more water will be received.
Chapter 72.
Bloodletting is not administered on the limbs but on the members where it is impossible to make an opening for the wind's passage because of their small size, as with lips and tongue; or in a member of flesh, as with the nose and mouth.
The quality of using those which have found blood vessels that are in the hollows of the ear.
Let the water drip gently into their ear, until they become famished and no cause of any kind occurs in their stomach; and place it on their chest from the start with a fumigation and air passages; and let them put it on.
When there are pains
If it is necessary to make a hole in the middle of the palm or the back, then do so with great care and youthfulness
If not, then apply water, vinegar, and salt to the area and compress it.
If the swelling of the veins in the body's surface persists and is unbearable, then apply a compress soaked with water to it and remove any previous compress over time to avoid further swelling.
If the swelling is multiplied, then apply vinegar to it or look for the causes of it, such as a strict diet, and if necessary, remove any previous compress to stop it.
Then, when necessary, change the veins (venous system), if possible.
If the veins are prohibited from suspension (venous thrombosis), then apply water or leave a needle in the area to stop any pain and prevent further recurrence.
When you want to soak them with a little bit of vinegar or salt, squeeze as much as possible.
From the initial treatment: restoration. This chapter is about necessary healing procedures in medicine, including bone fractures and dislocations caused by accidents.
Oh son, please know that the physicians and surgeons referred to in this chapter are those who do not respect the liberties of the ancients or follow the laws of these times.
For this reason, it is considered that the practice of medicine in our land is private; and you are not permitted to engage in it by these times unless you have also studied and understood the works of the ancients and learned their wisdom so thoroughly that no other science could replace theirs.
I recommend trying experiments and studying in the length of my life.
In this chapter, all that is described in it are the means by which my science has been practiced and with which I have done great experiments; put into practice what you have learned from reading these chapters, and make sure to apply them as stated; also describe at the end of the translation, and provide forms for administration like those used in previous chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from the fractures of bones, which are necessary to be mentioned before we start on the remembrance of the members affected by various diseases one at a time. "You have now finished translating the first sentence of this text, which means you've successfully understood all the sentences in it and can figure out what each one means.
"When a fracture or dislocation occurs in the limb, doctors advise to begin with phlebotomy or leech therapy on that part, if there is no other cause; otherwise do your best to heal it as soon as possible.
"And let the veins be content with herbs and foods that are light and light-colored; avoid fats and fill in any excess liquid into the veins to prevent swelling of the member.
"Doctors return the patient to their first regimen as soon as possible.
"When the bone is broken, doctors recommend feeding the patient with nutritious foods that are light and easy to digest; avoid fats and viscous food as much as possible; let them have water, fruits, vegetables, lean meat from cattle, eggs, fish, poultry, fresh bread, heavy or fatty foods, etc., in this regimen they put coagulation therapy on it for fracture recovery.
When bones are quenched when they enter the home and in their first layer and in their drops, it is impossible for them to continue and consolidate themselves over time due to the dryness of their members
However nature adjusts and connects the torn parts with a strength that adheres them together and strengthens it until the end of hardness and firmness, except for when they come to an end due to fatigue and exhaustion.
For this reason, it is necessary that you hold the restraints of the patient, which are heavy and viscous and large, as I've mentioned before.
The types of fractures are diverse according to the variety of body parts, for example a fracture in the arm is different from one in the head, and a fracture in the breast is different from one in the leg, and so on with all other members
Remember every type of fracture described in its separate chapter.
Many fractures in one leg Many fractures in one leg
Every kind is different in the restoration of it, as soon as it comes to memory in your places
The sentence you provided was incomplete and didn't include any more context or information about fractures. Please provide me with more details if needed. The type of fracture in the leg is known as: tortuousness of it, and its prominence and perception by it to your hand
Therefore, when there is not an evident tortuousness in the location and it does not feel like a fracture while touching your leg with gentle pressure without causing much pain, then it may not be a fracture
It is possible that it could be a small fracture or a small tear, without knowing exactly what kind of lesion you have on your leg and compressing it all. You should pause over it to remember which medication was prescribed at the time that suited this place, and use a fine needle for stricture.
You know that the location is curved and not cut in two or another way without causing damage to it, as you have removed all of its covering, so now you should begin your time to repair it by doing the healing treatment carefully.
When an abscess forms on the finger, cut off that finger in three days so it does not continue to fester and become infected.
It is easier for you to restore the bone than to cut off the bone, that which falls out in such a way as described above.
Then take the second one and apply memory to it.
If the body part is cut off from both ends but one side of it remains intact and the hand or leg is small enough to cover it, then you should use your hand as a bandage for the arm/leg that was cut off; or if two cords are available, wrap around them with one cord and place your hand over the area.
While holding the member in a position that is close to its normal shape while extending the other parts of the body away from it, you should make sure that both hands or arms are placed over those areas so they do not come into contact with each other.
Do not apply any ointment or medicine to the patient's body during their operation, and make sure both hands are touching each other when applying anything from one hand to another.
While holding the patient's hand at that time, you should ensure it is in balance and correct any other position while maintaining a balance of effort based on your judgment.
When stretching and compressing the veins simultaneously with doctors' orders to squeeze down on them, they might cut off circulation in the limbs; especially when performed during the operation of varicose veins.
The quality of the limb stretch is one that you recommend, in order to know how different limbs are in their size and shape compared to each other.
For those who are very small like the arms and legs you mentioned above, it is customary for them to be wrapped in a very soft cloth.
For those who are very large like the thighs or calves, it is customary to wrap them tightly and firmly so that they are connected closely to the limbs during surgery in order to strengthen and extend the limb from both ends of the stretch evenly; otherwise there may be confusion as to where exactly the limb begins.
When it is necessary to start an operation on the thigh of a patient who has broken his bone, you must suspend any necessary operations at that time over the location of that fracture, and gently stretch your hand towards him for support.
You must firmly press on the area of the fracture while supporting him with your hand to prevent any further stretching or weakening of the location of the fracture. You must gently stretch and loosen the area around the fracture slowly but surely until you regain control of the location after a large movement has occurred.
You must then take another object and wrap it tightly around the area near the fracture, covering any loose areas from the fracture; and thereafter, perform your operation on tightening up this area while loosening that one as you've already instructed in the first one.
You must pause between these two areas if they have the same tortuousity as that of the fracture, and otherwise do not pause in them for any cause.
You must pause over the other object, and gently alternate between these two areas as much as possible, if in that location there is no effusion or swelling to be seen, and pauses on top of the area opposite it from which the swelling originates; and lay this down for a few days; and you will then stretch over both areas.
The first steps of the ladder to climb are easy and broad
The first steps of the ladder to climb are easy and broad (meaning that the initial tasks or steps in a process are simple and wide), but as you progress towards more complex actions, they become narrower and more precise.
The threads become thinner and more subtle as you progress towards more complex actions (meaning that the initial steps in a process are simple but gradually become more challenging), and if they are too thick, then cutting them can cause damage to the cords of those performing it.
Very thin threads are not suitable for that process (meaning very thin threads may be difficult to control during the course of a task), and it is important to ensure there is sufficient space between each thread
If the patient is being treated on the extremities of the threads placed near the site where the treatment takes place, then it is important to ensure that there will be no harm done (meaning if the patient is receiving treatment in areas where these threads are located).
Some fractures heal quickly and without complications, but they can cause disruption in the code (meaning some fractures heal smoothly but may disrupt the sequence), leading to a change in the capital of an element's individual variety.
When a member is torn or ripped off the first day, it should not be held down by its sutures; rather let it fall freely unless you want to cover it with a bandage, in order to prevent further infection of an abscess
This refers to the methods used by ancient physicians when setting fractures or dislocations and twists (in modern terminology, these would be called setting a broken bone or twisting an ankle).
The method used by ancient physicians when setting a fracture was to hold the limb still and prevent it from moving in order to avoid heat or bruising; it involved applying pressure with a mallet, which would compress the marrow of the bone until its movement is arrested at the joints of the arm or leg.
The same method was used in order to compress a fracture without excessive pressure and prevent further movement of the limb after setting it.
Another method used to set fractures or dislocations and twists is the use of an afoidant (also called a lapdanum) made of lead. This was applied to both sides of the fracture and covered with a bandage until it had been compressed enough, after which movement could no longer occur; this would be useful when someone's arm or leg has been broken and needed to heal properly so that they could walk normally again.
When there is joint pain caused by cold humors that spread throughout the body, and when pains occur in the feet?
The doctor will cut open the joint and drain off the phlegm or mucus from it, and apply compresses soaked in cold water or alcohol to alleviate pain.
The joints and bones must be separated from the body's surface in order to prevent pain from occurring at these areas, fractures or cuts. In such cases, a compress soaked in cold water or alcohol will be applied over the area.
In this particular case, it is not advisable to make incisions and extract pain directly.
In the case of a broken bone, use glue and horse chestnut poultice to cover it.
If the joint is broken and you want to resolve it with a doctor? Try using other ingredients like rose petals, violet flowers, flour from wheat, etc., in order to cover and bind it tightly as possible without causing damage to the member being treated.
If it has been damaged, apply compresses soaked in cold water or alcohol to alleviate pain.
"The first step to treat the member requires a cure that is applied and rubbed into it, such as mustard, balm, flowers of violet, camomile, all mixed together with salt water or vinegar; depending on the quality of the member and its rest.
"In any case, it is necessary to keep the bandage or plaster tightly over the member while treating it in order to prevent its discharge and maintain cleanliness.
"If the member is torn or crushed, then it needs to be restored immediately and all causes of such drying out due to coldness should also be addressed.
"When it comes to the healing and pain of a wound: mix together egg yolks with vinegar or salt water, and apply this mixture to the affected area as a plaster.
"Depending on the severity of the injury and whether it is causing pain or swelling but not a tear in the tendon itself, then you should continue to treat as usual. When joint pain becomes intense or urgent or accompanied by swelling, then call the doctor immediately and have him/her attend to it urgently
Soak the limb in a warm but not hot water to reduce swelling and pain. Then wait for one hour before continuing.
Apply a thin strip or plaster gently onto your first constriction to reduce swelling and pain.
If all the pain and swelling have been relieved completely and no further accidents occur after that, you should apply a thin strip or plaster in the same manner as before.
If no further harm occurs to the member after what has been said, you should not apply it for three days or four days or seven days; and sometimes they are laid on for 10 days after making an incision in the member as previously mentioned, until the fracture adheres, and the wound begins to clot over it.
Adjust the constriction to that of your first constriction entirely and enlarge the vein as previously mentioned after remembering it.
When a fracture has been healed and extended, the soreness will cease to occur, so it is customary for doctors that when this happens, nourishment is prohibited until further notice; and therefore bandage it with warm water for three days; and gradually loosen the stricture by doing this operation on the member every day.
The restorers of the fractured member must be careful when not restored at first time and second if it is restored with difficulty; after another surgery is made, there is fear great, and if it were right to enlarge ancient times, they would lose freedom now.
They do not see the reason for doing this, because it is unreasonable that this should be done.
When a fracture occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and the figures of them are diverse, and their causes are distinct. Of all fractures none is caused by a blow to the limb, and blows cause injury to the spine, which they break through with force, so this type is called a comminuted fracture; or when the bone does not break along any part of it, but cuts into the flesh without penetrating further than skin, that is a simple fracture.
When the fractures are large or small, and if they are crooked or twisted; and their cause is the impact of a hard blow against an already-fractured bone
This fracture may be penetrating to the part of the bone where it is already weakened or in the face of the bone itself, and this fracture is large or small.
This fracture may be a capillary one in the subtlety of the small hair on the bone, so it is commonly called this special kind of capillary fracture.
This fracture may be caused by impact or pressure of the bone and is commonly called this kind of fracture where a thin layer of skin is removed from the face, and it occurs when there was an impact that fractured their entrance into the holes in the face.
It usually happens on the bones of the extremities, similarly as with head fractures.
These special kinds of fractures are often separated from other injuries in this way. You will find relief through rest and cure all that here.
All special kinds of fractures will be identified through examination and investigation of their causes, as well as from any contaminated tissue that is surrounding them.
"The special vessel is used to detect whether it has entered the mouth and must be withdrawn and lined over his arm, as if he were trying to break a black fracture.
"In the treatment of fractures, one must also consider the initial injuries of the patient and if vomiting occurs from fear or excitement, as well as diarrhea, indigestion, loss of consciousness, dizziness, fainting spells, and acute fever; all these things, along with the pain in the extremities, are symptoms that indicate severe illness.
"If times of accidents are not current to health care, then start treatment for this condition.
"The cause is that when pain occurs in the first place and it continues for several days, you should consult a doctor on the fourteenth day after every opportunity.
"If it's in the summer days, you should consult a doctor on the seventh day and ask that this matter be checked by examining for any accidents.
"If the fracture has already penetrated into the cerebral cortex and is accompanied by severe pain and stiffness of the limbs, you should indicate that this matter must be urgently dealt with and reported to your doctor.
"The patient's head is being lowered; place your hand on the second servant and guide it to its proper position, so that you may have better access to the wound.
"If you are unable to access the wound due to obstruction or contamination with blood and other substances, then place a damp cloth inside it and make sure to keep the bandage wet until you ensure there is no more bleeding, and that the infection has been contained; then proceed in the course of cleaning the arm.
"This is one of two types of operations to be performed.
"One of the two procedures to be performed is to insert a needle into the vein and administer an anesthetic with it. The other procedure involves:
"injecting another anesthetic substance.
"You must have several different needles from which to choose the one that is closest to the second; and the others will be of a greater length than those used previously, so that they may cause less pain in your hands.
"Use them for making incisions over the needle to prevent it from slipping and causing injury.
When the stomach is strong and hard, it is recommended to perform a treatment in its passage while you administer the laxatives that are called tartaroses, as they will not have deep effects
Do not remove the stone from its place or touch it with your finger, as this will cause the stone to be submerged and pass through the passage of the stomach.
It is convenient that you apply these tartaroses in large quantities depending on which one suits the specificity of each stomach, whether it is currently present in all tests or just at the tip of a particular extremity whose sharpness depends on its length and breadth compared to the amount of spiciness from this test.
The first type is a perforating quality of tartarose that you place the stone on the stomach and move it as shown in this figure into another location, and prevent it from passing through more than one hole to limit its size, or stop at any hole depending on how many holes there are available.
Insert the laxatives into the rectum and remove it gently with fine tweezers depending on what causes them to pass through or how they are applied
When you have opened a space between the patient's thighs, placed cushions under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
When you have already opened the space between their thighs and placed cushions under them, another on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, here comes the next sentence to translate:
If any bone is cracked or fractured and the bones are separated from one another, then you must take that into account when treating them, as it will be necessary to apply some remedy on the skin over the affected parts of their body.
The other operation is the easiest one and it should be done with caution, as this requires less pain than the previous one. This is what we call for: when you discover the part of the bone in which a fracture has occurred violently and visibly (meaning, if you see that someone's leg or arm is broken), then when you have discovered that part and placed it under restraint and care at an extreme distance away from this patient, he will become calm and happy.
The fracture of the tibia is the most common one and it does not cause any trouble at all, while a fracture in two places before long will be as serious as if there were only one. It is necessary to adjust the fractured part according to its condition on the body so that it becomes clear which is the severe injury (meaning you should look for broken bones carefully).
"When you have opened the area between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, now comes to translate.
The cause of the pain may also occur in other parts of the body, for example between the kneecap and the lower leg or around the ribs to name a few locations where it might occur and is typically alleviated by relieving them through warmth and/or pain medication.
If the pain does not penetrate into the body, and it is removed or disappeared by itself, you can say that the cause of this ailment and subtle sensations are unknown to many people, for they have prepared a number through various means so as to administer them in all locations that might be convenient or right according to which of these second one you lose your operation on that particular organ fractured and figure of him.
When you administer to your body the substances that stimulate the senses of those nerves and apply them directly on its fine parts, do not cease doing so continuously until all of them have been administered as well.
"In each small artery rupture or subtle fracture, when you administer a second treatment in response to the loss of blood correction.
"It is because they have not studied that art completely. "There are written many examples of large fractures.
"If the patient bleeds when you remove his bone, you should wrap him in a second layer of gauze and submerge it in heated oil, pausing it over the first dressing so that bleeding can be controlled; then apply another doubled or tripled bandage soaked in hot oil and cover it with the first dressing again. If you find that the amount of gauze is insufficient for control of bleeding, do not remove it but leave it on as long as there's enough gauze to maintain pressure.
"The treatment should be applied for one or two days until you are sure of stopping the bleeding; then remove it and administer medicines as necessary to dry up blood, such as mustard, flour, turpentine, and so forth.
"It is that you should apply these medicines powdered on the gauze as well as soaking it; and universally, use all medicine property which is astringent but not corrosive.
"Gather your wits to the task at hand: make sure the ulcer in your care is clean and not infected; nor add any virulence to it; for when adjusted over the pannicul of the heart, corrupt that one as well if you dare.
"And when adjusted over the ciphac of the head, causing it to be loosened from its place and mainly as soon as the cure is applied, it becomes darker on the surface; so consider that if you apply it to a patient, you know what comes next.
"And if you do not apply the darker medicine that has been interrupted and is in use of this medicine to make it dark again, then worry about your line as well as oil, for when adjusted over the ciphac; place a bandage on top of it; and apply it with the care of curing so that it may be healed.
"Here comes the third part to translate: 'The great disease....'
"Recovery from a broken nose...
"Know that it is not broken but two openings to the nostrils, or one of those covered with a veil, so that in it there are two bones, where one part may be cartilaginous and not broken, nor does it cause it to come out, rather than injury and tortuosity.
When one of the two parts is torn off or broken, then you should insert it back into its place as soon as possible, ensuring that there are no complications along with returning it to its original position. You can make this easier for you and remind yourself not to worry about the surgery on the patient's abdomen
If it is in the upper part of the nose, you should try to align it with the opposite side's smaller extremity.
If both parts are torn off or broken, then treat them as described in this text.
You should restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible, otherwise you will need to apply a compress as described in this text.
You should insert a pad into the nose's opening if it is in one part of the fracture, or put two pads together if there are two parts to the fracture and place them as close together as possible without blocking the airway.
The old restorers should place the pads into the body as soon as possible, and rotate them every day until they are not visible to you anymore. You should make sure that the pad is inserted firmly against the abdomen and maintain its position through the application of pressure.
"There are certain precautions to be taken in the nose, especially when it comes to sneezing, for fear of covering one's face with the scarf from a lion; and may not inspire deeply.
"This cause is not necessary to you; if you want it done, do so; if you want to sneeze instead.
"If another severe cold comes on, hold it in your nose or the mouth closed tightly with a handkerchief, or cover your face.
"If another severe cold doesn't come on, you should put on the powder of size and pearl from those coffins to the chest; and place your hand over it to prevent the nose from any cause.
"If the bones of the nose are broken or dislocated, you should ask about those who can separate them, and get instruments that correspond to them; and place a cut on it, cure what is in it, and at its center consolidate.
"If the nose bleeds, you should cure that with sneezing and administer plum water into which it is from all health.
". . .
"For the treatment of the mandible when broken.
When the mandible is broken and the fracture has not spread to other areas of the body, then protect the health by keeping it immobilized only if the fracture is in one piece and not torn apart into two pieces that curve at an angle.
And so if the fracture is in the right jaw, you must introduce an indicator into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if it's in the mandible itself, apply the same indicator to the left hand; and in order that the movement of the fracture may be facilitated at the parts affected by the injury, on the other hand take the opposite action at the point where the fracture is in the right part.
And if the mandible fracture has been separated into two pieces, then you must apply extension to both sides as long as it is possible for them to come together again.
If the teeth fracture occurs, then strengthen those that may remain attached to gold or silver or lead, and place a cushion on the broken mandible itself, another on the duplicate one, and a third on the large sheet, or have only one edge at the length of the mandible; put it there so that you can apply it, if not destroyed.
Command the patient to rest and tranquility, pause his breathing through sobs
If the figure is altered in any way, you will show it to them on the third day; and correct what has been changed there by applying oil of ginger, album of honey, or flour of cumin, so that you may cover over the affected part with fresh ointment made from the same things.
After you have applied the plaster to it and ensured that there are no wounds or ulcers nearby which might be affected by it, lay it on him, so that he may heal and strengthen his fracture in three days.
If any other veins swell due to the cold, doctors will administer this remedy in order for him to be healthy and cured of the swelling of his limbs.
If the fracture is above the knee, doctors will consider whether it has been separated or sutured, they suggest you apply ointment over those stitches in order to facilitate healing of those parts.
If the wound on his leg is severe and requires further cleaning, doctors will recommend applying more ointment to clean it thoroughly according to your need.
After you have applied the stitches and they are not completely healed, doctors will recommend cleaning the wound if it is wide; otherwise, place one of the plasters over that area to ensure healing occurs.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
Return the hernia to its cavity
When you break a rib, you must first stop the bleeding and treat it in one of three ways.
When you break a rib or separate it into two parts that cannot be rejoined, you must choose between restoring it or allowing it to heal on its own, as healing it is difficult, or the fracture may be too severe.
If the fracture is too severe, then you should have two surgeons working together to stabilize it and extend the time until a surgeon can repair it properly.
If you are breaking or healing a bone in a way that will not work the second time around, then you must ensure it is done with proper alignment and stability of the joint to prevent further damage.
When you are extending or healing a bone and need to apply pressure from above, then wrap it with cloth or yarn as the length is proportional to your need; extend and elevate it so that when you align it properly fractures will not occur again.
If you cannot align the rib to its proper position outside of the body, then it is necessary for the patient to be lying on their back with a cushion beneath them one notch higher than usual.
When the minister applies to the arm of the patient from above that his shoulder is elevated as much as possible, and pain occurs in his forearm, doctors fix it and bandage it with ties.
If you feel that the fracture is not very severe, have a doctor come and help fix it by cutting open those pieces of cartilage
If the incision is not very deep but necessary to treat it with one of the instruments you mentioned, please ensure that the fracture has been properly positioned so that this is how healing will take place
It's similar to the cavity that this is how healing will take place; and in order for it, either the size of the arm or the tightness of it
The length should be such that when performing the operation on both sides it may sometimes happen that one extremity is loose and the other tight.
If the disruption of the ligament that was cut when you extracted the piece of cartilage is wide, it's safe to apply sutures on both sides of the ligament.
If the disruption is small or you are afraid of applying sutures, then cover and dust the ligament according to the size of the cut in the ligament.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate every part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet
And furthermore, do not let the broken limb's support sag downward; and for when you see a patient with gout, if their ailment is becoming worse or the bandage is already torn, adjust it appropriately to correct this situation.
And place the cushion of the patient beneath their chest, and place it under their arm to elevate that part as well, so that both are elevated for support at once and thus elevate the broken bone of the forearm upwards towards the muscle; or place one hand on each side over their shoulder if necessary.
When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it typically lasts for 12 days
If you want to make an incision where it seems necessary or there is a fracture in the sternum bone, adjust the opening and restore that to ensure it is restored properly and the fracture of the furcula (sternum bone) has been correctly coagulated
It usually lasts for 28 days and sometimes the swelling of joints can occur during this time.
Yes
Restoration of a fracture in the shoulder
The spatula is torn on the outer edge and not on the blade itself.
When the blade is torn in the outer edge of it - whether on the upper or lower part - and not on the actual blade itself, then the pain follows immediately after as though it were caused by the fracture itself; therefore, you should prepare for this injury and reduce its size to match the normal figure in any way that seems possible.
Place a cushion on the heel of your hand, then place another cushion between them and hold it with both hands in an effort to soften the impact as much as possible.
If you place the cushion in a concave shape to the side of where the spatula was torn, then hold the cushion so that it covers up this area and adjust its position accordingly.
"Place a cushion under them, another on their legs, one more on their chest while holding their hands.
Consider the bandage in each case and gently massage them all, one more at a time until the bandage is no longer taut on its place.
Place the patient flat on their back.
The spatula is restored in 20 or 35 days.
Once you have completed this number of treatments, the sores will be dissolved and it is certain that they are from the bones which started dissolving without delay.
If you proceed from the arm's pit and place a cushion there, then take it off again, and secondly hold onto that which was mentioned in the fracture of the furcula when you come here.
The capital VII.
Restoration of the rib fracture.
The ribs have been broken and must be moved to their correct position, it is necessary to gently move the extremities of the patient and prevent any swelling or irritation.
When the leg breaks it is customary to decline any further treatment and severe pain occurs in addition to difficulty breathing, weakness, fatigue and shortness of breath. It is declared in this cavity with the broken bone and not hidden by feeling.
"The restoration of the patient involves placing the mattress on his chest and abdomen, pausing between their thighs with a cushion; and gently pressing down on their muscles, adjusting their spine into its proper position while supporting it as much as possible, ensuring that it returns to its original shape after surgery.
"Then take a pause on the mattress and remove any extra padding or cushions from under it gently but firmly to allow for even pressure distribution across his body. Ensure that there is no loose clothing around his broken limb as you wrap him in blankets; be gentle when placing the blanket over the injured part of the torso, being careful not to overly compress it with too much pressure.
"If the condition worsens or causes pain, discomfort, or other issues in that area, then gently remove any padding from under him and adjust his position to alleviate the issue at hand while ensuring he remains comfortable.
"The eighth caput [chapter] deals with various remedies for different ailments.
"The restoration of the spine when it is broken.
"Sprains of the back do not heal without proper treatment, and any attempt to treat them at home may cause further injury. When the intestine or hernia has been returned to its place, you have placed a cushion under their thighs, another on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
The restoration should happen as quickly as possible after the second attempt to correct it, unless there is a break in that tendon, then you may need to operate on it separately.
If the fracture of the ribs is declining to the point where it causes severe pain and puncturing, so that with puncturing you must do as you did for those who suffered from pleurisy, and place your hand on their chest, doing this in order to correct them; however be careful, because there may also be difficulty breathing, vomiting, and this is a difficult cure.
The Antis are working hard on that matter.
They say that the veins of the patient should be compressed and expanded to flatten his belly and stretch it out, making sure the fracture is kept away from there.
It may cause leakage of urine to prevent cramps, if not done; and if it does occur, the doctors will help with that.
The doctors would do things like putting a cushion under their thighs and placing another on their legs to prevent the intestine from coming out while holding their hands; they fear that the wind might cause them to leak urine due to weakness.
When the body is covered in cold oil and fine powder infiltrates between the thighs making it hard to walk or move, then place a cushion under them to support their weight as well as servants on their legs and chest holding their hands to prevent the intestines from coming out.
If the patient's intestines suffer from a violent cramp and the doctor strikes them on the abdomen at their point of rupture to relieve it, then they must lie down with a cushion beneath them so that they can breathe easily, as well as have servants nearby to help support their body in order for them to recover.
Then return the two large flaps of flesh if necessary, sew up those with stitches and heal that area as soon as possible.
If the patient is vomiting blood, then put fine powder into hot oil and place them on their chest so that the servants can help support them as they try to stop the bleeding.
Then spread a bandage over the area where they sleep in order to treat it as soon as possible.
And finally, let's move on to the next sentence of the text: "Capitol .
The restoration of fractures in the spine and hips.
Bones in the pelvis must be treated as well as those in the hips, just like bones in the spine of the body. When the pain occurs and you want to know if it is gout or not, the physician considers whether the patient's joints have been previously inflamed, stiffened, or deceased (in which case the joint has died), so as to prevent its extension/stretching further; in addition, when pressed against a sharp object like an awl, the pain does not occur
If it hurts against a hard surface or when pressed with a sharp object like an awl, the physician knows that there is no gout, and the patient will recover
When pain occurs in the abdomen and you want to know if it's gout or not, the physician considers the weight of the patient
When the patient has already mollified themselves and you place them on their side, it will cause vomiting if they want to urinate but cannot, then know that this is fatal, so avoid trying to force urination in such cases.
If there are no other causes of the pain, its cause must be gout and it is milder
The cure for it is to press a sharp object like an awl through the affected joint from below and above until pus comes out (or in some cases, when you feel dry, apply oil to the pointed tool); once satisfied with this, stop applying pressure on the joint.
When the pain has stopped from the cushions that are placed and remain firm, stretch on top of it gently; command the patient to rest calmly and not sleep on the area where they still feel the pain, so as to prevent it worsening
If the cause of pain is removed from the bone or any other part that has been separated from it, stretch on top and hold it gently so as to close that area; if necessary, sew up any torn skin over it securely; and apply a soothing ointment to prevent scarring, which could worsen the injury.
If the heel of the foot is broken and it's at the end of the course, stretch over your hand that was used to hit them with a light tap or gentle blow, whichever feels better; and hold onto the injured area tightly as needed to prevent further damage.
If you feel broken bones in it, stretch over that area and hold onto it tightly; cover the wound with a sterile dressing to prevent further contamination before seeking medical attention.
Caput.
Recovery of the bone.
The bones of the arches are broken if they break, and when that happens it is accompanied by pain in the area and injury to the skin around it; and after a fracture, the swelling can be quite severe.
The restoration of it consists in extending your hand over that part which ought to be above the fracture, which is its shape
If it's only in the extremity of them, then you must apply that second one on top after applying this one which is shaped to fit its natural shape
If the fracture is in their abdomen and has declined to undergo surgery, then you should put it on top of them as if they were going to be used for the restoration of that fracture. Once it has been applied and placed on top of them, pause above the plaster or bandage, and apply pressure with a finger or thumb over that spot to prevent any injury from the fracture nor damage to the splint.
Apply it in such a way that the part you're applying to should be above the bandage when applied for even pressure, and have the patient sleep on their side or back as necessary.
If an accidental cautery is needed, then stop applying the medication and its restoration when it has been burned off, and place it on top as before; and return to the restoration of them, and press it down so that it may be used for cautery again.
If it happens in their mouth or tongue, then you should stop immediately.
When joint pain occurs due to cold humors infiltrating every part of the body, especially in the feet, it is customarily referred to as gout by doctors.
Repair or set right a broken bone.
The adjutory is that which goes between the head and neck of the vertebra
If it is broken, the restoration of that bone may be done in one of two manners.
The two extremities are placed on both sides and are suspended from a higher point
The patient is placed on a bench or bed, and the broken arm must be supported so that it does not hang over to the side of which would otherwise cause damage to the curvature of the limb.
The attendant should support it with something soft to prevent any injury, or extend the arm out into the air so that it does not rest on anything hard; and the doctor shall examine all of its bones thoroughly when it is broken, so that they may know where the break occurred.
The other way is to raise the patient's head and support their hand in its hollow, ordering two attendants so that one of them has what it needs for setting the bone straight against his or her chest; and the other will have the plaster ready upon which they may apply it to the limb.
When you wish to extract it strongly, the doctor will stretch over the fracture and over that other one too, whichever of the two ministers extends towards both its parts
If the fracture is near to the extremity of the muscle, then place both ends of the ligament over that part and the other end should be placed on top of the fracture itself
Similarly if the fracture is near to the joint, then place both ends of the ligament over that location and over the other one as well.
Engage both ends firmly and apply it correctly as much as possible, the doctor will stretch that if the application is not correct.
If the cautery was applied incorrectly, then place a cushion on the suture immediately after it is tightened and over that area if you want to prevent it from coming out, stretch that accordingly.
The doctor's method for stretching that is to place a cushion over the fracture and use another piece of cloth around it as well. Then, put your hand on top of that and hold onto the other one as you stretch.
Hold your hand in place of the broken arm if necessary to prevent that from occurring any further damage to the bone.
The doctor uses stethoscopes.
The doctor pauses on the fracture over which one of the stethoscopes should be placed and how far apart they should be from each other; then pause between each stethoscope to measure their length, so that you can calculate the total measurement after three measurements are taken.
Stretch over the stethoscopes at the beginning of the examination.
The doctor's touch on the location of the fracture should be gentle. When placing a tourniquet, apply it more gently than when applying pressure to an injury.
If you find yourself in a situation where the examination is done and the member is back to its normal position, then the doctor may proceed as needed.
If you are afraid of using a tourniquet, then apply pressure instead and use the stethoscopes later on as needed.
Before applying pressure for three days to avoid bruising or swelling, it is forbidden to use a tourniquet in excess and restrict blood flow; therefore correct all of this according to what has been said.
If you are concerned about causing any harm from doing so, then do not remove the ligature but wait three days or more.
"The patient's bed should be positioned towards their back,
"Ensure that the adjacent cushion is filled with warm wool, and consider checking every hour or so to make sure there are no tears in the broken member, as it may have become flaccid; correct this if necessary.
"The patient's bandage should be changed as soon as possible after the initial dressing has been applied, ensuring that it is soft and gentle from the moment it begins to come into contact with the wound, and increase its size if necessary.
"The attendant and the nurse should change every 12 hours, ensuring that they are fresh, dry, and administered as needed to correct any errors.
"If the fracture is closed, you do not need to change the dressing or bandages for days or even two months.
"Section XII.
"Treatment of a broken arm.
"The arm is composed of two bones called the ulna and radius. Of which one has a smaller end that acts as the thumb, while the other has a larger end that is held by the smaller bone to prevent it from coming out.
When a great fire has been extinguished only by a large one or a small one, and when a small flame is extinguished
When the small fire has been extinguished by you, then healing of it will be easier, and its cure will be easier
When a large fire is extinguished only by a large one or small one, but when a small flame has been extinguished it will take longer to restore and heal
It was bad when two bones were broken
When the bone that has been broken by a small fire needs healing from the doctor, it is advisable for you to ask for assistance as soon as possible so that they may be quickly restored
When a large fire has been extinguished then the healing will come swiftly
If both fires are extinguished at once, it is advisable to seek medical help urgently
And if you need to take the shape of her hand, then you must heal it and treat for its cure spread over a cushion, and put on each side your hands, so that all others might be done in turn, and the ear should be above one raised level, and the patient's head below another level.
And if you have to put it in the upper or lower position of her body so that she won't fall down.
When the first doctor extends his hands to the patient, place one hand under her breast or arm, and another minister extends similarly.
The second doctor should immediately apply this remedy on that part of the body if it is suitable for doing so.
If there's a problem with the bone that you need to drain all pus from its location and your own ability is fine for doing this.
If the separation is from where you cannot reach to restore it, then do so with your own strength and place that hand over it as well as the other one mentioned before.
If there is a fracture in the leg, you should already do this capital letter alone and then take care of it immediately.
If the fall occurs immediately after your treatment begins, you must put a wet cloth soaked in cold water and white on it to make it more absorbent between two pieces of gauze and subtlety, then tie it tightly over that area which needs attention; afterwards remove the wet cloth and place a prepared plaster of quick-drying flour mixed with clay.
You know that the names of the splints for the arm are available in different places or if there is a fracture in one arm or two arms separately.
When the bone is broken very hard and violently, when it may be necessary to straighten the break or pieces that are loose and soft from the bone itself, pause the straightening for a short while so as not to precede the memory of him at the beginning of the chapter.
The bandages that surround the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or tight, and faithful are those who stretch it gently between fine and coarse, as has been recommended.
Consider the member, its ligament is being pulled apart. If any cause arises for which correction is necessary, then when it happens to the member, and the pain occurs from your touch that causes you to break the member apart as a result of this precaution.
Do not put too much pressure on it, until you pause, then return to straightening the bone.
If the bending has already been softened and the body is relaxed and as it was, then do all that with your strength to correct this matter
Consider that if the nourishment is prohibited to come from the bone through excess of pressure, then do soften it a little and let it go for some days until you run into that with your strength, and stretch it properly.
When a patient's illness is not due to any cause mentioned above, the doctor understands that it must be treated within this number of days or within this period of time indicated below.
The hand of the patient is placed on his chest to keep him still and let them sleep in bed.
The fracture is restored within this number of days or the other indicated below, except in cases where it requires less than 28 days to restore due to complications and the healing process itself.
Chapter 13.
Of the treatment of fractures in the arm or leg.
When an arm or leg fracture occurs, and does not occur elsewhere, then it must be treated here.
When an arm fracture or injury occurs, the doctor understands that the patient should continue to move as much as possible and place their hand over the affected area for support.
The minister extends the bones that have been broken, and the doctor will examine them immediately thereafter
The doctors understand that they should place a bandage on and stop bleeding if it is not immediately stopped with cautery, and put the patient in bed according to how much of their body part was affected, and you have wrapped them in cloth
When the hernia is in the abdominal region, do as follows: place a cushion on the belly and lay your hand upon it.
Place a cushion on top of the body in order for the patient's chest to be placed upon it, and hold that hand while you stretch this one as well.
If the hernia is in the fore region, do as follows: place a cushion on top of your hand and lay it upon the chest, so that your hand may be elevated and bent; then release the knot and stretch them both simultaneously.
If the hernia is in one of your armpits, do as follows: place both hands on top of it and stretch them simultaneously; then release the smaller cushion while keeping the larger one elevated to prevent swelling.
If the hernia is in any other part of your body: place both hands upon it and stretch them simultaneously while keeping one hand on top as well; or release that smaller cushion if necessary, alternating between stretching those two hands as before.
In your care, always remember to apply a pointed cautery or other method of treatment while doing this: if any kind of cause appears during it, repeat the explanation given previously.
"When joints are affected by cold humors invading each part of the body.
Restoration of a broken bone from the thigh.
The bones that connect to the thigh have been torn, and it is declared as second degree by the fact of detachment from the lower part of the body
The restoration is done by placing a bandage over the fracture and another around it, with the patient lying down on their stomach and face.
And then extend the plaster to cover both sides of the wound after assessing its severity when the fracture is on the leg or arm.
If it is necessary to plaster the leg of the thigh, then apply the dressing to cover the wound at the bottom of the leg, so that it can be removed in its entirety, and another dressing for covering the fracture.
Similarly, if it is necessary to plaster the arm of the thigh, then apply the dressing over the wound at the bottom of the arm, so that it can be removed in its entirety, and another dressing for covering the fracture.
And the surgeon will bind and cover it with plaster if you reduce that second joint as a result of the swelling around the affected part, so that the wound is sealed and closed properly unless there's an additional member involved. When the seal of the letter is broken, you must unseal it quickly before time runs out, and return to your task.
The seal of the letter should be made as follows: cover over the break with something hard and fold it in half, or three times around if necessary; remove any excess material; and close it up so that it fits into the pouch part.
Between the pouch and the letter put in some parts that you can remove; also put a few pieces between each of your two arms to support them both equally well while holding on tightly with one hand, so as not to let go even if you're wearing gloves.
And place a cushion over the pouch in the location of that break as well, and also place one stone on either side of the letter's opening.
And put a few drops between the pouch and the strap to make it tighter around them, in order that they are closed tightly together.
And start with a very tight seal around the location of the break three times or four if necessary; and as you get closer to sealing it, your seal should be looser but not too loose nor too soft.
And extend both of the letters' straps to their full length into place until they are connected securely around the foot; and hold tightly all four extremities in that way, so as not to let go from where you hold them
When the opening of a vein has been made over there so that it doesn't occur in another member or be cauterized or inflamed and such like those; but if any cause occurs from these things, then apply something to heal this with quick action while I have said previously.
If the vein is not easily accessible then apply it immediately after discussing with another person if that's possible and otherwise do so by itself and remember to cure whatever preceded this caution as soon as it has been remembered.
And certain precautions must be taken in this fracture of the thigh along with those mentioned earlier and on the arms.
Moreover in the restoration of it this caution must be taken not to occur to the patient's claudication; and if restored alone then apply another cushion as well, it is necessary that the one which was just mentioned should stay seated.
You know that the thigh is painful for days or a few weeks depending on its complexity and nature.
Chapter fifteen.
Restoration of the fracture in the ankle area.
You know that the fracture in the ankle is severe and may lead to the loss of motion.
When a fracture occurs in the body, then pain is only a fissure or sprain at its places, and that over it all remains as feeling
The restoration of it is such that everything goes back to its original place, except for the parts that were lost due to injury or disease, and then it is placed back in another part as necessary according to its condition
And place a cushion on that round stone if needed, and put your hand close to it in order
And consider all the dispositions that were mentioned in other fractures as well, so that you may put it back together and prevent accidents by making sure that everything is properly positioned where necessary for its health
The sixteenth chapter of a medical treatise.
Restoration of the fracture in the leg
It is known that one of the bones in the leg can be large and named after it, while the other is small and named fragile.
When two bones of the arm fracture in this way, then the restoration is done similarly for both and the operation is one.
If two bones are broken simultaneously, the leg becomes all parts.
When the bowel has been gently pulled out from between the patient's thighs, it becomes visible to the doctor
If the bowels are forcefully removed, then those causes may not be what is being looked for
Then after having opened it gently and making a cut through it lengthwise, you should sew up the edges
If a break in the bowel occurs during removal then it is customary to remove any parts that may be damaged and sew them up tightly
The break in the bowel is not something to be operated on directly through the arm, and when you complete your whole operation it should be checked for any other causes that may have gone unnoticed, as well as checking all the muscles of which it was removed, the length of those compared with the length of the bowel itself, from the top down to the bottom.
Then wrap it up tightly with multiple wraps going along its length to match the length of it exactly, and place one over the top incision from one side and another on the bottom incision from the other side, and then go around until you have finished the bottom edge.
Then take the two sides and put them into three locations on both extremities as well as in between, for this procedure to be done correctly it is forbidden to sew the bowel at its left side or right side.
In this sentence, 'brasset' is referring to a tourniquet used for restricting blood flow in the arm or leg. The first part of it ('longuesa') seems to be related to the length and/or size of something within that limb - possibly 'camba', which might imply 'vein'. The sentence then states this tourniquet should be applied at its full extent, effectively closing off circulation to restrict blood flow in a vein.
Additionally, when using it for fractures, remember that there is potential for the tourniquet to cause damage or restrict blood circulation even further if not properly applied.
When you study the vein and its surroundings in order to prepare for treatment, remember to also check for any other symptoms such as swelling or bruising that may indicate complications; if no problems are found then proceed with application of the tourniquet.
What do you mean by "capitol" and what is its significance?
This sentence indicates that the medical text pertains to fractures of the bones in the foot and fingers, i.e., the lower limbs.
Fractures in the toes are rare and usually only result from unusual circumstances or injury to the foot itself.
If bones in the feet are broken and sometimes they need to be elevated above each other, remember that the patient should lie flat on the ground as well, prepared for any further complications.
And after lifting the foot above these bones, place them gently, press them down and hold them in that position until further instructions are given.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, place a cushion under them to prevent their movement.
And then put your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out and place a cushion under them as well.
When the three or four days have passed and you start to notice bones grinding together, or if they are starting to shift out of place, then it's time for surgery
If the joints are shifting out of place, then restore them and align them as recommended by your doctor during a joint restoration procedure. Place the second cushion at the length of the leg and place your hand on that recommended table, align it with the first one, and then put pressure on the joint to restore them.
If the joints are two or three times out of place, pause on each leg cushion placed with cloth covering and put pressure on the table at its lowest point, holding it over one of the heads of the table to prevent the abdomen from coming out.
It's important that you don't forget to mention all the causes mentioned in previous fractures of accidents, and pause from any more accidents at this point.
When joints are afflicted by cold humors that spread throughout the body, especially in the feet, this condition is commonly called gout by doctors.
Of the veins of the female part and the veins of the penis and the scrotum are torn off.
When the veins of the female part are torn off, pain arises in that area and it is customarily called sciatica by doctors, with the feet being an important location for it to occur.
If the veins of the thigh are torn off, and if the veins at this spot hope to be restored; and if the woman's vagina is cut through, elevate her legs slowly step by step until everything comes back together with the veins healed up and the intestine restored.
Place powders on the thighs and when you want to urinate it flows easily; reduce them and return that second powder from where they were initially placed, and repeat this process as necessary until you have returned to your first initial powder.
It will be done within seven days or sooner depending on the case.
If you want to do this, take a sheath and stretch it over the opening of the vagina with a catheter; insert that into the vein in the vagina, and inflate it until the vein is filled up, then the tear will return.
When pain occurs in the joints caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body
When the nails of the fingers or toes are torn off, then apply a poultice and incision as prescribed in that place.
And in those injuries close by and few wounds, instead of that other person whose studies you mentioned and who understands this my free will; for that fracture means in the most severe cases to be restored and tightened in it, so to understand
When the nail is torn off a finger or toe, apply ointment and wrap it in that way; and if you have wrapped it with gauze for three days or more and then bandage it up again, so to heal it.
Chapter 9.
For the treatment of fractures when they are open wounds.
If the bone is broken or fractured in such a way that it penetrates deeply into soft tissues like the finger joints, elbow joints, or any other similar area where the conditions of phlebolotomy are present according to my previous statement, then you must consider phlebolotomy as prescribed.
If the wound becomes infected then apply poultice and powder it if you suspect it is due to another cause.
When healing a fracture in that time of day, do not keep it for long if there is danger nearby.
If danger arises while healing the fracture, stop the process in one day and go to another day if there is still danger nearby, but do not continue on the third day or after that unless you find a solution for the danger.
If your tooth is broken and you are in a hurry to reduce swelling, do the best and simplest thing possible.
If you are not prepared and cannot find one nearby, do the best you can with a similar tool; its length is seven or eight inches (18-20 cm), and its width second to the amount of the padding used for that specific fracture.
And when you finish, make sure not to leave any excess material in order not to be double-bagged during the operation time.
The extremity for which there is no margin on its extremities, and the largest part of it towards the direction of the openings.
This is how to do it:
In Greek, it means "the finger of the doctor.
To prevent an extremity from touching the other's face, raise one extremity and place that above the other's face
That will make it so that returning to the eye causes no harm.
Then force the limbs of the fracture to be between them if one limb is broken and cannot bear that burden without good reason, then call on doctors for help
If you cannot reduce the abdomen as recommended by doctors, then call on the servants to whom we have given instructions regarding those incisions that we have mentioned; or shall it be of one of the servants in whose hand is your power.
Then raise him from beneath the abdomen and lower extremities.
When the abdomen is reduced, and lowering the pain of the gout becomes intense, doctors know that the organ has not returned to its original location; and at this time you consult a physician greatly.
When you have completed the restoration of the abdominal area and you see that it is black or other causes in the place where oil exists, then do not let anything drop on this surface, neither does it come into contact with the cloth nor any other cause that could damage the repair.
"The servant should measure the surface of the patient's belly button and cut the bandage accordingly to avoid tearing.
"Be very careful not to tear the bandage as you cut it, or else the stitches may be removed by the surgeons and the injury may worsen. "If the patient's belly button incision is large, mild, and different from the incisions of other fractures.
"If the bandage is large or of poor quality and you are afraid that it may cause accidents like those that have already been mentioned, avoid placing it over any hard objects in the area.
"Once or twice the bandage can be used repeatedly as long as it is intact and you still have a dressing to cover any wounds that may need attention.
"Please consider the bandage every day and night until it is solid and closed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that any bleeding will be minimal.
"If the bandage is passing several days and it is not consolidated or closed on its own, then you should consider removing it to prevent further bleeding. When joints are affected by cold humors which separate and extend them, causing pain that affects the member and creates soreness to strike, you must apply what is below as soon as possible
If the abscess occurs to the vein or artery, it is serious, or if another species of corruption and putrefaction occurs, the doctors advise caution in applying what follows as soon as possible
From what you have just written: when large veins are torn apart, the attendant must gently touch both sides of the vein and the assistant's elbow, as well as the larger members of the body; never cut through the skin or extract it from the body, for this would lead to death; unless there is a quick solution available, you should cure the abscess if discovered, otherwise leave it.
The term "capitol" does not appear in my previous response. Could you please provide more context or clarify what "capitol" refers to?
In the event of a fracture that occurred, it is customary for medical practitioners to apply treatment to restore the damaged area as soon as possible.
In the event of a fracture that occurred in an area important for joints and is causing the figure of the member to be distorted, it is customary for medical practitioners to strongly prohibit the movement of the affected limb as this would cause further damage.
When a rupture is recent and administered by those medicines that have just been taken with water or wine, examine them; see if there are any pus, pus cells, or discharge; also check for scratches, scabs, or wounds on the affected part of the body.
Do not apply any poultice or compress to the affected area for at least 2 days. Instead, gently squeeze and press it firmly every day until it is softened up; then place a cloth soaked in something warm over it, as warmth helps to soften it more quickly.
If the rupture is in a sensitive area (like your genitals) and you need to open it up carefully because of pain, the sores will be spread on the affected part of the body, and too much fluid may cause swelling or discomfort.
Chapter 21.
Restoration of a rupture when it is restored and brought back into its original position gently, without causing any discomfort to the affected part's natural movement.
When a rupture in the bones is restored, and brought back into its original position gently without causing any discomfort to the affected part's natural movement, the treatment does not involve anything except: excessive solution of the ligament or excessive tightening of it; due to excess fluid from inside the ligament that may cause nutrition to be prohibited for the member; due to excessive application of unguent; due to unnecessary movements at an inappropriate time; or due to poverty of strength in the body and weakness.
"The patient should lie down and the doctor will administer leeches to drain away the bad humors, and provide bandages as well.
"The doctor should apply a compress to the limb so that circulation is maintained and continued application of leeches or a cold bath may be applied in order to restore normal nutrition.
"Chapter xxii
"When the bones are properly reset and prohibited from further surgery, the healing process begins.
"When the member has already restored its natural healing of its injury and strength back to its original bone structure, it should not be prohibited from further surgery as long as that member is still a part of the body.
"The doctors and restorers who have performed this operation in our time, they fear the consequence of which is deadly.
"If recent claudication and numbness occur along with the swelling of certain parts of the body, such as swelling in the feet or legs, it means that the leeches should be applied to the affected areas to alleviate inflammation.
When some veins are dissolved by cold humidity they cause leg pain that occurs during the day and lasts for hours.
The tortuous veins become rigid and twisted as a result of cold humidity; they must be treated with care to prevent further complications, such as the dissolution or bursting of the veins themselves, which may lead to the loss of small capillaries due to the delicate nature of their rupture, and it should be done in a manner that avoids causing harm to nearby tissues while still achieving its goal.
Chapter 33
On Dislocation
A dislocation is the act of forcibly separating a joint from its place, which prevents movement and results in severe injuries to the member.
When an accident occurs with a dislocation, doctors must act quickly to reduce it, and not let any delay pass by in which case the joint is separated from its place, causing severe damage and making reduction of dislocation difficult.
And thus it cannot be that they should be held back or restrained during the time of the reduction procedure, as spasms and pain may come to light.
When that happens, doctors should proceed to the cautery of the patient's foot and place their hand over it to prevent the intestine from coming out, then return it back into its cavity; apply wet water and oil to the member and reduce in a manner that is easy.
The first member being treated here will bring memory back into its location.
After the previous dislocation of the limb, begin from the point where the fracture occurred towards the opposite side.
The twenty-fourth chapter.
Treatment for dislocation of the jaw is as follows...
If the two jaws cannot be reduced by little force (the first method), they are dislocated and held open by a third party, with their mouths closed to prevent saliva from escaping; or if this is not possible, then perform a complete dislocation into which saliva must run out and the patient's tongue is covered over his mouth.
When the dislocation is slight, the pains return in a great many ways.
If the dislocation is complete and painful, then treatment for it should immediately be given, and not delayed at all.
The minister shall hold the patient's head, and have his mouth open for the treatment of dislocation of one jaw only (if partial) or both jaws simultaneously if there are two dislocations; and in either case have another servant remove those that are further away from where they should go, so as to align them properly. And command the patient to close their jaws and allow them to fall back into place; then the surgeon shall open the mouth again and pull it back into position.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary to call gout by doctors.
Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Then place the patient's head between two pillows to prevent it from rolling to either side; and do not let any other cause a disturbance of its position; have established their base as requested, when the pains subside and the mouth is closed, you may proceed
Then administer the medication that is to be given through this opening of the mouth; and drink water as requested when the mouth is opened; having closed it after having given or taken the medicine, and having made sure the mouth has been rinsed
If it is difficult to reduce both mouths at the same time and they are not converted into the correct positions during the day or night; then after a bath of vinegar and salt water, and having drunk pure cold water, do you get heartburn from the patient's belly, and suffer severe and frequent attacks of colic.
When you do this, the pains disappear; and sometimes it lasts until the person who gets that affliction meets with something like it in a certain number of days
Chapter 25
Correction of dislocation of the shoulder and arm extremity
The furcula is not dislocated by the continued pressure on its chest; and some patients are dislocated at the outset of treatment, as indicated here.
The restoration procedure is that the patient lies flat on their back and extends their limbs. With a firm grasp at its base, where it returns to place itself
Place your hand gently on the pad and pulp of that [area], and strain lightly over there.
The extremity that was dislocated will remain so until [unspecified time], and the pain is reduced and healed as you've been told, and after treatment is complete.
Gently place your hand on the pad and pulp, apply pressure over there, guiding the patient to remain still while it is being treated with calm and stillness.
The procedure of reduction is reduced when the extremity is separated from its place.
Chapter 26
Correction of dislocation of the limb.
The first sentence translates to "The muscle is not dislocated, but only in three ways, one of which it is dislocated at the start of the thigh and another at the end of the thighs.
The second sentence translates to "And the second way is that it is dislocated at the start of its muscle, and this is done with caution; and it is not dislocated from behind on the back; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
"Furthermore, if dislocated in the place where the bones are scarce, it is done with great care; meanwhile, if in those in which the movements of the limbs are less, it is done with difficulty; and also on those that have fewer movements, it is done outside with greater difficulty.
"If the blow strikes forcefully on these bones and the muscle is dislocated with caution, then it is done in such a way that it has already been dislocated.
"Furthermore, once you are above the level of his chest, the physician will proceed to examine him with great care.
"You can distinguish between the dislocated and the normal muscle by noting whether there is concavity at its end or if it is straight; you also look for the concavity of the thigh bone and note how much motion in that direction it has, so that one hand cannot reduce to the head of the muscle without moving all over.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it causes pain in the feet as well, and it is customarily called gout by doctors.
If this dislocation occurs when fresh and the patient is warm, do reduce its size quickly, otherwise not to be concerned.
The reduction of it should be made while lifting the patient's hand to their chest, and placing a cushion under them as well, so that no parts are harmed by the motion.
If you have previously said not to return it or if the procedure is just starting, then days later, doctors should ensure that the patient's feet are elevated and moist with a compress, which will help soothe any discomfort caused by swelling, friction, and chills from the injury itself as well as treatment.
And hold the patient's head up with support so that it does not fall back down during lifting and straining, and place your hand over their mouth to prevent choking or gagging as well, while another minister holds the head of the muscle at its top, and have a cushion placed under the patient's arm to keep them from being hurt by supporting their upper body.
"If you want to, then reduce that second man's member in the same way: and it is customary for you to have a servant present who is large enough to be able to reach into the patient's side, from which he will remove the testicles of the patient and lift them up towards your shoulder. And another servant should take hold of the patient's scrotum and gently pull him out through his belly. "If a hernia is likely to occur, then the doctor orders that another servant should be suspended so that it cannot move around.
"You then proceed with another servant: and that you have placed on the top of his head someone whose body is broad but not too thick or soft, so that they can be lifted up by the patient's hands and held firmly while he moves around; and place your hand over the other part to prevent it from leaving. And extend the body of him with the strength required for the joint movement, as the hernia returns back to its place in a hurry.
"If the reduction is difficult due to all the causes mentioned before, then the doctor uses this cure. And it is customary for you to take a cushion that has the length of two fists and width of four fingers, and its thickness should be as little as possible.
The physician approaches the patient's head to prevent the fall of the hernia into their face.
The physician places the patient's thighs and extends his hand or arm above the face to prevent the hernia from falling into their face.
The physician places the patient's hands on a flat surface at an angle and extends his arm to prevent the internal hernia from falling out.
With the help of a skilled attendant, the physician places them on the stretcher and spreads out their limbs as much as possible to prevent straining during transport or removal from muscle tissue damage.
The physician gently places the patient's member as little as possible, ensuring that their body is supported to facilitate healing and recovery.
The physician first gently places the patient's member but does not overly restrict it to prevent swelling or restriction of blood flow, and if fixed in position is maintained without relaxation after surgery, the physician has completed their work.
If the joint is dislocated due to humidity or other reasons, then doctors administer three incisions as mentioned in the chapter on surgery for its treatment.
When the ligament and joint are not fixed yet, and the space is reduced between the thighs, you have already opened this part to the patient's legs, placed a cushion under them, another on their chest, another on their hands holding them in place.
From the dislocation of that which you have already done on the back and buttocks, return to place the pillow or the mattress behind them, extending it as much as possible in front of where they are.
And having administered that other stretch, apply this one so that it heals completely
And if the severe pain occurs in one of the legs and is accompanied by slow movements, doctors will apply gentle massages to relieve this gravity and return it to its normal state.
Chapter 27.
Treatment of dislocation of the hip.
When the hip joint is dislocated and returns to its normal position with difficulty, or when it is dislocated from both sides, especially behind the front side, and the dislocation of it cannot be restored without great force, as you try to straighten out your leg by holding that part back while standing on one foot.
When the patient's body is opened up to expose the dislocated part of their thigh or leg, then you will put a cushion underneath them and another on their legs as well, and another on their chest holding their hands in front so that they cannot be torn out, while keeping it open until after the cautery procedure has been performed.
The restoration of the leg will happen if it is possible to reduce by extending its foot and its arms, by spreading open its muscles, and putting a band around its ankle in order to prevent it from being torn out during this procedure.
If the dislocation is at the front of the leg, then doctors will pull their hands apart and cut into the area of the palm to restore it.
If the dislocation cannot be reduced, doctors will administer strong stretching and force-ful measures.
Two ministers are holding them apart to prevent the stretching from pulling their hands away too far.
Then they wrap around both arms of the patient tightly with a long bandage over their hand and arm.
When the doctor cuts into the area of their palm, they will lubricate it to ease friction and prevent any harm that could come from tearing or cutting. After this procedure is completed, doctors should then tightly pull the joint back so it can be restored with a force.
The first step is to place a cushion under the patient's thighs and another on their legs, ensuring they have support while lying down.
The next step is to loosen the joint and place a cushion over it, ensuring good support for the patient as they lie down.
If the joint is not stiff, apply some lubricant to help with mobility and place a cushion over it for support during treatment.
If gravity becomes an issue when loosening the joint and movement occurs after that, apply a lubricant to lubricate it gently but not too much, compress tightly, keeping in mind that some looseness is necessary; pause over the joint occasionally as if you're trying to pull fat off of it, then place it on your elbow or knee. Once you've placed the cushion and applied lubricant as needed, ensure that any friction during loosening is minimized; when ready to treat, place it gently over the joint to support motion during treatment but not too hard for optimal movement. The moment you're applying the lubricant, get ready as soon as possible.
If you wish to, pause over the damp and cold area on your body while applying it to that joint; then apply some warmth after as needed to loosen it up further.
When pain occurs in the feet due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is commonly called gout by doctors
During the dislocation of a joint, do not let your arm touch the other hand.
When dislocation occurs on one arm and the reduction of it happens gently, then contrary to other joints, however fast it should be done at the time of dislocation so that the location is not lost or if it were to occur in the location where the cautery was previously made.
The reduction of the dislocation is to place the patient's arm on a table and have the attendant extend the patient's hand towards it; then the doctor places their own hand or palm over the imminence of the joint, and pushes that back into its location.
If the patient's palm is already on their belly and there are no previous dislocations, then place both of the patient's hands on a table and have the attendant extend one; if the dislocation was previously done with one hand only, then position them intrinsically over the table so that the doctor's hand lies over the imminence of the joint.
If that is the case then good, otherwise they will struggle with their arm pressed back and place it there; and if you do not agree or cannot, neither should be done nor can proceed to reduction without passing through them days.
When joint pain is caused by a tortuous movement; and there is no cause for the patient other than its stiffness, softening it with gentle care can prevent any harm; knowing that nerves are strained or twisted because of this, doctors say that gout occurs due to excessive heat in the joints
After the return of the intestine or hernia to its cavity is complete, gently massage it as recommended by doctors, and stretch it daily while also exercising the hand that held it tightly
If the movement of it is excessive and causes harm to its surrounding area or viscera, doctors will loosen that portion of the muscle as much as possible to alleviate any discomfort.
The end
From the care for dislocation of those things
All the parts will be dislocated at once.
If any part of those things is dislocated between the two hands or in the stomach, then doctors will stretch it and try to prevent further dislocation by keeping both hands pressed together, until it returns to place.
Then hold the head of the dislocated part and support that in the hand where it was dislocated with gentle care, stretching for two days.
Then suspend it gently and stretch it continuously until both sides are even again.
When the second is done, I will then tell you another story and exercise that part of your body every day until it's finished; this may take several days to complete.
If the stomach is dislocated from the body's front, lie on that side and perform your first operation, making sure it heals properly.
Similarly, do this when you have dislocated any other parts of the body.
[No meaning found]
The cure for dislocation of the spine from both sides.
If either of the two sides or the neck are dislocated and they cannot be restored to their normal position, then there is no cure; in fact death comes for the patient.
This means that the vomiting of the patient is outside their will and cannot be controlled; and any attempt to control it may make some of your muscles weak or do damage to your kidneys, liver, lungs, or any one of these organs; if you try to restore a spine back into its place, all attempts at restoration will fail, and all efforts made to restore the same will ultimately lead to death.
So this has been done on both sides of it; no more attempt can be made after that
The care of him is that the pain arises from cold humors infiltrating each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it's customary for doctors to call this gout
The care of him may also involve percussive or percussive percussion on such parts, the ancient ways of treatment being most effective in this case. The practitioner should have prepared instruments for this purpose and apply them to that part of his body, so as to remove the excess from it, by the close proximity to another part of the body mentioned previously
The care does not include treating the part of his body where it has already been mentioned above, but rather treatment on another part that is specifically recommended in this case.
The patient should be laid flat on their back and have something wet applied to prevent the feet from being exposed.
Place a pillow flat on the ground near their head and also place one on each of their feet in the other extremity of their body.
When the minister has taken hold of it, let it not be fixed into a cavity; another minister takes the other one in that manner
The first minister shall gently place it on the top of the patient and let them hold it firmly; another minister takes the other one in that manner, placing his arm around her hips to support her; and adjust all the straps so they are placed together on the opposite side from where he places the head of the mattress onto her.
The minister holding the straps should extend it to the foot of the mattress without removing the two feet and straps from their places where they are fixed; but not as firmly as we said before.
The doctor places their palms on the back of the neck and onto a table, and adjusts them so they are positioned at each end of the table when returning.
If not returning by that method, the doctors place a table with its latitude or longitude set to three leagues, and face it in such a manner as described for the patient on one side of which they have already spoken. The doctor places their hands on the back of the neck and onto another side, ensuring that the head is properly positioned as they return to their location.
"If you wish to lift up the leg that is bent upwards and place it on the ground in front of the other leg towards the foot side, make sure there are two fists' width between them; then take hold of its head with one hand and pull it towards your chest, ensuring there are still two fists' width between the fist you used to hold onto it and that part of the body.
"After you have made a fist with one hand, bend both fists together towards each other in two steps.
"In the extremity of it there is a fist that has formed from it and its length matches the one you are using to bend; in both other fists they are similar.
"Secure the restraints that you placed on the patient's chest and arm to prevent them from pulling away when you are lifting up their leg.
"You should place one hand in the center of your chest and have another doctor hold onto it while you lift up the leg.
"After the spinal cord is returned and its location has been established: pause briefly at a sharp edge of the table which length is three inches or longer; then place your hand over this area to stop it.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary to call gout for doctors.
If there is no urgency in the location of the treatment or it should not be done immediately at the end of the healing process, then the remedies are to be administered gradually and for a long time according to what has been recommended; so that it can be applied at that location with a feather pad.
Some of the reasons for urgency in the lower back are: the dislocation itself, and it is necessary to treat such an injury; then there may be those who have been advised not to apply this medicine due to its cold nature, which can cause frostbite if applied improperly, so do take care that you prevent such an accident.
31st chapter
The treatment of dislocated bones.
Joints of large and muscles cannot be dislocated only; but do not apply to those that happen in the other joints with small relief or indentation.
The joint of the large is dislocated after four ways: it can be dislocated at the fingertips or on the forehand, inside, outside, front or back.
However, it is most likely to dislocate in the direction of the fingertips and slightly towards the front or back.
When the joint is dislocated at a finger's tip or when you adjust the mattress of the patient and the patient becomes pain-free, then the leg must not be allowed to bend; it should remain stiff for fear that its head might protrude from between the cushions
The sentence refers to accidental dislocations being contrary to an intended dislocation (which is not specified in this context).
If the dislocation occurs as mentioned and the mattress is stretched further than it can handle, then the pain that originates from this should not be bent or allowed to move around between the cushions; hold down the leg with both hands so its movement cannot cause harm.
If the dislocation occurs behind and does not expand the pain or cause further movement of the leg that could bend it, then hold down the foot with both hands so its head cannot protrude between the cushions.
The goal of this procedure is to consider whether the dislocation has already healed and been cured by previous attempts at treatment if it is a persistent or recurring condition, in which case further treatment may not be necessary; otherwise you should proceed with reduction as usual.
When the dislocation is recent and it's one of the four types of dislocations, then you should apply what follows to restore the joint and stretch it in both directions, ensuring that it returns gently without any other cure being needed
If it does not return in this manner, then apply a strong stretch to the limb from which it occurred, stretching both sides of that limb separately, or across the chest if possible; and apply a hand strap on top of that limb so as to prevent any more hiccups from coming out.
Stretch the arm towards the opposite arm or stretch across it if possible to prevent any more hiccups from coming out.
Stretch the whole body of that patient as much as possible towards the ground, and hold them in position while you wait.
This type of stretch is common to all four types.
If the dislocation returns in the manner that we've described then yes, and if not, then you should apply another type of treatment based on your own judgement.
When the dislocation occurs at the base, when the dislocation is at the bottom of that arm, place your elbow on top of their head so as to prevent any more hiccups from coming out; and stretch across both elbows towards the top of the shoulder and the upper part of the arm next to it.
When you have placed the patient on their back and opened up space between their thighs with a cushion, prepare to insert a large cushion into the opening of the hernia, extend it towards the heart in order to force it out violently as soon as possible so that it returns where it belongs.
This treatment is used when one member of the body has been reduced in size compared to others
When performing this treatment, hold both of the patient's legs tightly and firmly, supporting them at the bottom as well as their ankles.
The length of each leg should be equal to the quantity of four spans, and the patient's bed should be extended more than the other by two spans.
Place the patient on their back facing upwards and make sure it is on a flat surface that measures two spans in length.
Prepare a strong young man to reduce the size of the hernia and place him on top of the patient, with his knees at an angle that pushes it back into its proper location quickly.
When performing this treatment with the patient lying on their back and experiencing dislocation, you should ensure that they remain in place as tightly as possible while also holding them down by placing your hand firmly over their abdomen and chest.
"Place the cushion under their buttocks and another on top of them; place one cushion beneath their head as well.
"The doctor extends his arm towards the patient and gently guides the reduction according to the art.
"When the dislocation occurs on their lower limbs, they should gently stretch out their leg towards the doctor; and after that, tell the story of how to do it for them. The doctor places his hand over the patient's hand and guides the other arm to place a cushion under both legs at once.
"If the dislocation occurs on their upper limbs behind, they should not force them to stretch out both legs at once but instead lie flat on the ground; hold down their head and shoulders so that they cannot move, as mentioned before.
The compression treatment should be applied to the location of the joint that experiences pain.
After the reduction is complete and you extend both legs of the patient, when you pass over their groin area and expand that space, then the doctors know that the second member will be returned - and adjust two cushions and pause compression to stretch as wide so that it isn't too tight in any part.
After applying the reduction and compression, compare one leg with the other
Then if you have stretched those fingers as wide as possible, the doctors know that the dislocation is fixed and you can remove the patient's foot now
If there is no cause for mollification, the doctors return and stretch it again, extend that after your first stretch, then let that be stretched for three days.
After stretching that area, let it rest in mobility until you feel comfortable with it.
Chapter 22
Treatment of dislocated fingers.
The finger is dislocated after three attempts, if it is dislocated externally or internally and in between the joints; but if not dislocated at all then
The first sentence seems to be a medical instruction for repositioning or realigning a hernia, specifically targeting the legs and chest areas of the patient. It commands the servant (possibly a physician's assistant) to apply a cushion on top of each thigh, as if it were a mattress, while holding the patient's hands in order to prevent any dislocation during this maneuver.
The second sentence is another medical instruction for repositioning or realigning the intestines back into place, this time targeting all of their parts (which I assume are organs). It commands the servant to first apply pressure on the patient's abdomen and thighs, then gently extend their belly, and finally hold both hands over the abdominal region while placing a cushion underneath them. The final instruction is to ensure that they return back into place once released from its restraining.
This sentence seems to be an additional instruction for the servant, possibly a physician's assistant or nurse, regarding the reinsertion of an organ back into its place in the patient's body. It commands the assistant to apply pressure on top of the patient's belly and thighs while lifting their legs off the ground, but without exhausting themselves (as indicated by "no-laboroza").
This sentence seems to be another instruction for the servant, possibly a physician's assistant or nurse, regarding the application of pressure on top of the patient and their legs in order to reinsert an organ back into its place within the body. It commands the assistant to hold this cushion (possibly a mattress) onto the patient's belly while also securing it with a bandage for three or four days, and then removing it later.
This sentence seems to be an instruction given to the patient regarding their mobility while they are recovering from surgery or injury. It commands them not to walk for a certain number of days so that they can heal and feel comfortable.
If the reduction to you is excused, the doctor will provide very strong and urgent remedies for any infection that may occur during treatment as a result of this narrative history.
Chapter XXXIII
Of dislocation of the ankle
The ankle may be dislocated by stretching or the second blow, and dislocation of it is either called internal sprain or external sprain.
It's important to note that the cause of dislocation could be flattening of the ankle at the time it is dislocated.
The treatment for sprain may be to rest, and that both quick relief and healing time can vary greatly depending on severity.
When dislocation occurs as a result of the second blow, you should gently press on the area directly behind the two fingers that caused it and apply a very strong and urgent remedy for pain relief
Take your right hand to the top of your chest and place your left hand at the back of your head.
Take your right hand to the top of your chest and place both your hands on opposite sides, extend them in front of you, hold your head up with your left arm, and support yourself with your right arm for walking.
When joint pain occurs due to cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it customarily called gout by doctors.
And return the intestine or hernia back into its cavity and place your hand over that area to prevent it from coming out.
Then if you return it in one or two attempts and the patient's foot stays intact, that is good; otherwise, doctors will perform surgery to remove it.
If the reduction of this hernia is forbidden and it was recommended by doctors, then place a cushion firmly on the ground under its two legs, put another cushion on the floor nearby, and keep your hand over that area to prevent the hernia from falling out.
The minister of that part should extend his leg over the patient's chest or abdomen and on to their side; another minister extends it against extending from its side towards the bottom of the leg, and keep a cushion between the thighs of the patient in place so that the patient does not lose his hold.
The doctor inserts into the healthy part of their leg and another minister holds on to the patient's thigh so that the dislocation returns in a comfortable position.
And once the dislocation is back in its place and declared to be healed from the reduction of it, doctors will continue holding their leg firmly as before, and make sure both legs are straight.
The first sentence of your text translates to "The nerves that run behind the tailbone must be protected from damage in order for it not to cause pain.
You should support that part with two or three days, and if the discomfort is alleviated, hold on a little longer.
Support it for one more day or four days, but do not let the patient strain themselves excessively in that time. If you remove it right away, make sure the dislocation is not caused by damage to the bone or cartilage, and do what's necessary in order to correct any swelling that may arise.
If the cautery is applied on that part where our narration previously mentioned it and another location for treatment and anointing, make sure all wounds are healed before proceeding with further care or anointing in order to ensure proper healing.
Chapter xxxiv
The treatment for dislocation of the feet.
If it is dislocated gently support with minimal force and let go when done.
If the dislocation is in both feet, make sure to lift the patient's head so that it rests on a flat surface or table, and hold them like you would if they were normal.
Then support their feet and place their head on something like a pillow that is positioned against the joints, hold it in place as firmly as you would if they were normal, and keep them steady until you see them still and not appear anywhere else.
When you have opened the space between the patient's legs with a cushion placed under them and another servant on their legs, and another on their chest holding their hands, hold this first for three days; then remove it to allow free movement of the bowels for three days unless the bowel is completely healed or there is no discharge from it.
Chapter 55
Of the injuries that are caused by blows or fractures or any other kind of injury.
If the cause of these is not treated and you do nothing to heal or restore it, there will be a high risk that death will result.
It is not advisable to rely on the art of medicine alone, nor that which saves only by length of time and compassion; but rather it is better for one who uses medicines as a remedy from the outset with caution, so that good health may be obtained instead of or in addition to relief from disease. Instead of using the remedy at an early stage when it is possible without risk
Instead of administering the remedy to the member when it is possible without risk and curing the lesion at this point, it should be used as an ointment that has been prescribed with caution and cure the wound from the dry heat.
When a dislocation occurs and the separated bones are set to heal, the physician will perform this procedure in order for them to say that what was previously mentioned in those areas where it is preceded.
After this, guard and avoid the second one from the same way of fear as in previous times, for it is better to you by your own Creator, may be eternal with your glory, and many blessings to your body, true in these days. After saying the prayers of Al-Baqarah perfectly as he has mentioned it earlier Ameen.
