O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest work of the science of medicine, embracing its employment in its entirety, and I have finished it through its expositions and pronouncements. And it came to pass that I realized I must accomplish this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely surgery
And because the work of hands is far-flung in our region and is rare in all, if it is not learned and practiced, and if it is not refreshed, the science and art of it are lost, and nothing remains of it but the little descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have moved And this is the source of error and idleness, and the minds are closed and the science is confused.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation. Or it seems to me that I can make it live together the ordination of this practitioner according to the way of exposure and declaration and the abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the fire cautery instruments and other things of the work with the agreement of the declaration and preparation of the patient, as it is necessary.
Or it seems to me that I can give life to this treatment in its entirety according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the cautery instruments, and other implements of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary. And because none of our masters of hands can be found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged And it is necessary that he who undertakes this should be well versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he understands the structure of the limbs, the shapes and joints and separations of bones, and knows the bones and nerves and muscles and joints, and the number of bones, and the movement and rest of them, and their issues.
And thus Ipocras said that one should not go about it without the non and with the work it is thus; and in the art of hand.
We say in the beginning of this book that whoever is not learned in the things that are before said, if he dares to speak in error and to blame the homes;
Therefore, many times I have seen more of these things which intervene in this science and abandon its science and sense for experiment.
For I have seen fools who coppied I apostume of scrofula or a woman’s neck, and coppied the arteries of the neck; because so much blood flows out that the woman dies between her hands.
And I have seen another fool who treated a stone of a wound, and the stone was great if he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and was dead for three days
And thus I am already being called to deal with it, and see the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and know well if one should cut deeply into it, for it would surely kill him.
and I have seen another fool who treated the duke of our land who had a broken limb, and with the treatment made him worse.
And the sight of ignorance hinders the bursting forth upon the wound as it is held fast by a strong ligament, and does not allow the wound to bleed at all, and leaves it unclosed at the end.
It commands that it should not be detached from me.
And thus, when the limb has fled and the bone has gone astray, it has perished
I call for help to come and I hasten to unfasten the limb And when I see it dislocated, if it is quiet and causes no pain.
But every way corruption is already confirmed or the limb is ruined, and it will not heal;
And it continues to corrupt the limb as long as the limb is entirely lost
And thus another wrinkle that undermines the flesh, enflames and burns from the malice of its lord
For a wound caused by melancholy humours does not suffice except for touching it with iron when it is not in any other part of the body where it can remove all that is corrupted.
And for this reason, very skillful physician, you must know that the hand is divided into two parts: that is to say, thumb or there is peril in several positions.
and I will show in each chapter where there is doubt and peril.
For you must always bear this in mind, so that the fools do not speak badly of you
If you take your arms in custody, and undertake your patients gently and firmly, and use the better way, then by the grace of God you will come to health and be praised
and leave the contagious diseases far behind with sobriety and sanitation
and keep your arms from that which makes you doubt, and have faith that you will pass from this world to the next in glory.
The hairs grow long and even: if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady until they grow. Do not take me in charge of any bad ailment, for I am not called a fool by chance.
I have devised this treatise in three chapters
The first chapter deals with fire cautery and the treatment of acute diseases, and this chapter commands from the head down to the feet.
and the forms of instruments, and forceps for cautery, and everything that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter deals with drawing out and piercing, and abscesses, and wound treatment, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; or where there is doubt and fear, many die
and this chapter commands and the forms of instruments
The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things;
And it is ordained from the lords above to hold the head of the shoulder up to the wrist, and the forms of the instruments.
When we remember our works, it is clear that I must say the quality of the help and the danger of neglecting certain complexion.
I say that the qualities of the helper, and the doubt, are the longest words and the subtlest science and the greatest secret response.
and about these things they speak many times in this book, and agree with this.
and I am overcome by them because of their words, for I am reducing the length.
I say that the cautery helps universally in every complexion or where there is matter, for it is two complexions: that is to say complexion hot with matter, and complexion dry with matter.
In complexion hot and dry together with matter, they do not say that there is no benefit, and they say that the cautery is a great help; And the others say the opposite: And the others say the opposite: that cautery is of no use in diseases that arise from heat and drought. For the nature of fire is hot, and must not be used to cure heat-related diseases by heat, nor by drought;
and they say that indeed it does great help in dry and heat-related diseases that arise in summer in the houses. When you compare the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have never seen such a thing happen before in experiment.
And in all ways, fire should not be used except for those who have experience in it, and who know by long experience the chapter of cautery, and the variety of complexions of houses, and the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and the issues and the space of tension
of other complexions we have no fear, even in cold and moist diseases And you must all understand and agree to the cautery.
Know that fire cautery is more effective for certain secrets than burning cautery.</start_of_turn>
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
The healing medicines of fire come from one member to another in aligning, and cause the sick limb to regain health from grief. and sometimes cause the patient great pain.
Fire, because of its height and for the goodness of its substance, does not make this worse, if there is no excess.
And this I have learned through experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into this art, and it is confirmed by the truth of things
and because of this I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to keep secret the secret which is reported or the fire, and the quality of the work, as it expels the diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates Or leSuivez en vos pensées.
Know then, child, that it is fitting in what way the cauteries should be performed and when they are urgent.</start_of_turn>
Or I say that cautery is permissible in all cases, for the harmful things that follow are driven away by the aid of the cautery. and even if the cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot wait until the greater harm has passed from the limb
And do not think, my son, as the foolish people do; for the disease that is cured by cautery does not come back thus it is said.
thus it is said. but it is not so that they would care for it, for the cautery is only medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine for its haste, and for the value of its work and its lordship
And it is known that disease does not come about at any time according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virtue.
And it is assembled in him the superfluous humors by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if these are not cauterized when administered in place or if there is much superfluous humors and moisture, as with cauteries of fat due to pain, and similar things, and part of the pain does not return again.</start_of_turn> But this is often the case.</start_of_turn>
And many people do not understand that the cauteries are called behind medicine, and it is seen.</start_of_turn
but they do not believe that the cauteries are worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is the cauteries that are behind medicine because whenever we administer other treatments for any disease and they do not work, we then administer the cautery, and it is worth.</start_of_turn
Although the cautery is often used as the last resort in medicine, it does not suit the understanding of the fools.
The old men say that gold cauteries are more discreet than those of iron, and they do not say that of other fires except for the quality of the gold and the fineness of its substance.
They say that the smell of the cautery does not remain in the air, but this I do not believe, for I have proved it, and I have seen it in many men
Gold cauteries are more valuable than those of iron, as they say Whenever you burn an instrument of gold, you do not know whether it is golden by the color of the gold, and when it has cooled down.
And if you burn it too much It becomes red hot And thus there is enough hindrance.
Or you have commanded this chapter from head to foot, for this reason that they may be more easily found.</start_of_turn>
These cauteries are useful for moisture and cold on the skull, and there are two methods to use them because of the disease called “soda,” and because of the many humors that descend from the head to the ears, and for many dreams and pain of the teeth and throat, and even for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
And thus the form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicine that changes the head three or four times, according to what is useful and agreeable and to the custom of the patient; for the patient can endure it. Then make the head of the patient well again.</start_of_turn>
And then make him sit comfortably between your hands, and put his hands under his feet;
Then put the root of your thumb on the root of his nail between his two eyes.</start_of_turn And there you will find your two middle fingers, if it bleeds from the nail then withdraw the cautery which is called "olivare", for this is its form.</start_of_turn And take out the limb that shows the sign of ink, and make it descend and extract your hand back and forth, alternating. Then keep your hand steady, and rejoin the limb if you see the bone slightly out of place; and if you do not see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you
Then take hold of it a little, put on gloves and cotton wool inside, take out the limb, and leave it for three days.
Then put on soft wool outside. and leave it on until the swelling has gone down Then treat the wound of the swelling which is called “tetrafarmaçon,” until it is healed
And they say the old folks, the more time passes over a wound, the more it purges. and for this reason, if the wound is treated early, it helps quickly.
And they say none of these that we must leave the cautery on for so long that part of the bone is scorched, and then we must renew that which is scorched from the bone, and be cured.</start_of_turn>
And they say that if the fire cautery is delayed too long, the swelling will burst out as large as a woman’s girdle.
And the wound must be left open for a long time then it must be cured and dressed
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good for all cases, for in some people or where there is fear of pain;
I believe that moisture must be left there
For the head of the shoulder is often loosened by continuous solutions of the same kind, as we have seen in other limbs.
And thus when the head of the shoulder is weak by nature, the first sign of the fire cautery is more soothing and limp than before, and for this reason I will abstain from it.</start_of_turn>
When there is chronic pain lasting a long time, one must use for the patient herbs, pills which are called "cochices", and vomiting of the head and oils and poultices.</start_of_turn And if we do the cautery as we have said, it is of no use.</start_of_turn Beware if the head of the shoulder is of great strength and is not too cold.</start_of_turn When the cautery is finished, then cauterize as we have said above. When the burn is done on the limb from the shoulder down to the bone, as we have said before, and do the burn or bruise which is called a "vessel". and put on a bandage in place. align your hand so that you do not see me until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this burn than in others, and I will speak of it later.
it must be understood that the cauteries of the horns must be finer than those which we cauterize the moisture of the shoulder, and this is the form:
Dou cautere dou chief. When pain suddenly arises in a part of the head, and it spreads throughout the illness, the head of the shoulder is expelled by medicines that alter the body, and other treatments have been made as mentioned in the division of diseases; but all this has been to no avail. Therefore, make incisions according to two methods, namely with water and fire.
The water cautery is when you grasp a fleshy tumor with tweezers and expose the bone underneath, and then make the temple or the part where the pain persists until you can restore the tumor under the skin;
and when it is restored, if you bind and strain it well and leave it for twelve hours. then take off the bandage and treat the tumor with fire, and leave the wound for two or three days. Then put upon the shoulder a cushion plunged into the bore as long as the shoulder blade is stiff.
Then the treatment of the inflammation until it is healed;
and if you see that you must do something of those medicines that I have written or dose treat with other medicines.
The iron cautery is as it is taught in this manner. Leave the hairs long and even on the patient.
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a cup or there is little curvature, and in the middle has a small appearance;
and put it outside the painful limb, and hold your hand and rest the fire a little while, until half of the thickness of the limb is burned over
and keep your hand that the artery does not burn, that is withdrawn, and there is abundant blood
After applying cotton wool around the limb, leave it for three days; Then I put moist cotton wool inside the wound, and then treat the limb until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if you burn this abscess with the cautery which is called “cultellare,” at the tip, and you cover the artery in this abscess that is not ancient.</start_of_turn
After having put on cotton wool around the limb for two days, and having taken it out; then I put on moist cotton wool in the hole, and finally treat the limb for swelling until it is healed; and if you cauterize this embolism with the cautery called “cultellare,” at its tip, and keep the artery in this embolism from being cut that is not ancient.
When you treat the abscess as we have said before in divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cautery must precede medicine and that it does not suffice, then you must refrain from using the cautery which is called “cultellare” while it is soft.</start_of_turn
If he seizes the limb with a hand's breadth of length, and grasps the hand once, and strains so that he does not cover the artery and does not live up to the bone.
Beware of the jaw that is mute when you touch it, and it has no return except for mucus and spasm only benefits the patient; beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or from the copping itself, for there is great fear and indeed among those who do not know how to do it, and who have not studied or practiced it. Leave the work in the middle of the way.
But I will tell you how to staunch blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it is said.
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize in the middle of the wound as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the surgeon of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two handles. These cauteries are better and more helpful than the previous one
If you see that this cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the surrounding area just as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has 1.5 cuts; and this cautery is better than the former and more helpful.
When the ear suffers from cold, and there has been no success with soluble medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then you must apply this cautery which is called the "point," as follows:
After pricking all around the painful ear, or around both if the pain persists in both, and you have loosened a piece from the root of the ear as soon as you have seen the sign of engagement; And there are ten points around the earlobe;
After treatment, let the limb remain sound.
After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the joints if the pain persists in both, and you have loosened the earlobe from the root of the ear as soon as you have signed the mark; and there are ten points around the earlobe; after that, cure the ear until it is healed.
A fire cautery should only be used for those wounds which move with pus, as we have said in the division of diseases.</start_of_turn>
And do not make the cautery where there are only dry and scaly wounds.</start_of_turn
When you have cured this semblance of torture which comes with hydric vomiting and hiccups and swelling of the head and throat, then it is enough to cauterize the patient three times.</start_of_turn One in the root of the ear, the other half an inch below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two eyebrows.</start_of_turn
And put the cautery on the part which opens sound, and make the cautery at the base of the ear under the cheekbone, and one at the temple just as long as a bean. And leave the cautery on for as long as half of the hair on the head is burned.</start_of_turn>
This is the form of the cautery.</start_of_turn
It is like the knife we put in front of you, but it is a finer and more delicate cut than the knife, so that the wound is larger.</start_of_turn
After treating the wound as I have said above, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
When the swelling is old and you have cured it as I have said above, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have a fever, then make three cauteries.</start_of_turn II grasp the two horns of the head, and I embalm the head, and I insert the tongue which is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and afterwards cauterize on the mouth of the stomach.
And be cured as we have said before.
From idleness
For this disease it is fitting to give the patient herbs and pills that temper the brain
after raising the patient's head and placing on the back of the head a bandage of mustard seeds which is written or treated with plasters.
This is the method of cautery: if you do as I have said
If it is well-informed, it is good; If not, make three cauteries on the head of the sufferer, descending juice until it reaches the collar, and leave a space between each cautery of one thumb.
And treat him like the others, and if you see him improve, and the patient is conscious, make one cautery in the middle and if there are blisters, two others on the two corners, and treat until it is healed
or the cautery which is called "olive oil", as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be stripped of hair and what has been said before
after reattaching the head of the sufferer, then make the cautery on the head and on some corners, and one behind and three on the collarbone
And if you have more trouble, and the limb is moist and the patient is fainting, and the disease is urgent, make three cauteries on the spine of the back. And leave them as long as the pain is greatest, and keep your hand steady; After the wound has healed, when the pain has subsided, the cautery called "olive" is applied as we mentioned before
It must be that the head of the shoulder is loosened from the socket and the things we have said before; after that, raise the patient’s arm, then perform cautery on the head and shoulders, that is, behind and in front of the collarbone; and if you must do more, and the limb is moist and the patient is drowsy, and the disease is urgent, make three cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave them until the pain is gone, and keep your hand steady; after that, cure as long as it is necessary, and the cautery which is called “olive” that we have said before.
Epileptics should only use strong cautery when it is appropriate, and must first modify the head and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffering from excessive medical care.
If a young child cannot endure the pain, make him gargle and chew with teeth that soften the brain frequently with bones of flesh;
When the head of the shoulder has been displaced in the middle, make one cautery as we mentioned before, and two cauteries on the vessel and on the scapula And if the patient is strong and suffers, make incisions as I have said to those with paralysis and hardening of bones, above the spine of the back and the neck, and either do the cautery of olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make an incision as little as possible according to this manner:
When melancholy causes superfluousness or corrupted moisture and large phlegm, then make incisions as we have said to those who have paralysis.
And if melancholy is the cause, the superfluous liquid decreases in melancholy; and the body of the patient becomes moist. Therefore, he should drink something that cools the head, as is fitting in this division.
After that, raise the head of the patient; then make a perfect circle around the limb, as if with a circle, and hold it firmly in place
and if the patient cries out, keep it firmly held from all sides
then present the limb, and take a mouthful of old barley bran; and apply the fire gently, so that it can be endured by the limb; After emptying the circle by its depths, immerse the head in cold water and let it cool.
And do this for the patient once a week for seven days with good governance, until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
When the hairs are pricked at their base, keep the eyes still until they grow
This method of cautery soothes the brain immediately.</start_of_turn>
Then put on a wet cloth in the burrow and fat with gelatine.</start_of_turn
De l’awe des eulz When awe first comes, there are signs that I have mentioned in the division; then command him to drink and to anoint the patient with something that will dry the head, and keep him away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more than once every day.
Then command him to rest his head, and do the cautery on the head and do two cauteries on the two temples if it descends from the ear is as two eyes together, or if it descends from the ear is in one.</start_of_turn
And cauterize all the veins and arteries that are around the ear, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple.</start_of_turn
Leave the blood undisturbed and if you see too much blood spurting, if it is coming from a part that you suspect is injured as you have.
I shall teach you how to extract arteries and cauterize incisions in such a way as to prevent them from bleeding excessively.
And never make the cautery or the cautery iron touch the two bones behind.
And you see that these are cold, flecked superfluities, then you must make the cautery as I said at the beginning of this chapter: the tears I cautery the head, and I cauterize on the two temples, and I cauterize or grasp the bone from the two bones. and if necessary, if the burn is too large, I cauterize cautiously above the eyebrow with every small burn.
When you have treated the patient as we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three bowls of wine to drink afterward I reset the head, and I burn or mix with olive oil and make two burns on the ears which are called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, one below the cheekbones
and beware of the artery that you do not cover it.
And that is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the oil of the limb is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery which is called "olivare" is applied Leave the hairs long and even on the patient
And if you see two boils so long as the boils are;
and do not let me go of the hand force until a third of the hair has burned away, as I have said before.
until the hair has burned a third of its length. There is often the conversion of hair to oil when the hair is pricked, and the oil is cauterized in two ways: either by fire or by burning medicine.
Or the fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow long and even, then put the patient in the right position. After seeing on the eye of the patient a figure as big as a mustard seed, or as the beginning of the sign of the hairs;
Then I put cotton soaked in egg white and muscle juice on the oil, and then I cover the cautery with this form:
After cauterizing at the place that you have signed twice, twice with the mouth open, so that the hair is as dark as possible there;
And the sign of the health of the work is that you see the pupil withdraw, and the hairs rise to the point of the oil.
Then hold your hand, and leave for three days, and then put cotton soaked in butter until the scab has healed After the cure of washing while it is sound.
And if after this the hair comes out, and the wound is softened, then repeat the cautery on the same place as before
And if the hair is plucked out, if the wound is healed to its natural state, and is even, do not prick the hair with the oil
The cautery of burning medicine is that you command the patient to leave the hair long and even, then make a parchment like the leaf of myrtle
then take French soap and live chalk, each a third, and grind them together well and make it boil until it does not reharden, then put on the parchment like the leaf of myrtle, and put on the wound the eggs. And if the patient holds his breath in fear, if one must open in him, and if in both cases; and puts on soft cotton wool soaked in vinegar in the eye of the sufferer.
and the head of the sufferer is placed in its normal position and puts his hand showing on the medicine, and presses it every time the patient feels the medicine biting, because he feels biting just like fire.
When you have performed this for a long time, if the bones of the medicine are to your credit. And when the biting has passed, if you lift the limb up, and reward if you see the swelling rise up just like it would rise up by contraction of fire or by incision; and if it is firm, it is well.</start_of_turn>
If this is not the case, if you must give more medicine to the limb or the medicine has not been applied, as long as your works are equal, and your eyes are fixed in place.</start_of_turn>
Then put on a moist cotton swab in the hole as long as the hairs are long, after cure the swelling which is called "dyafenis" and the other, while it is sound.
And if you are confident that you have well secured your limb with great care that it does not need any more medicine, then keep your eyes fixed in place.
And if the swelling becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the oil, if the medicine is repeated on that limb which is softened by the swelling beforehand; after cure while it is sound.
and that is the shape of a worm's head
and know that the ears of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to these constraints;
And let him not return the right way to the one who is studying this art.
And know that the ears of men are diverse in size, and according to that, their constraints are different; and do not be answered by the straight way to him who studies this art.
When you cure fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cure does not profit, then you must cauterize according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put his head in its rightful place. and hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, do not let go of his head
after put cotton soaked in egg white or in vinegar on the oil;
then warm the cautery which is divided:
and let it rest on the head if it forms like a pine cone, gather so that it is the cautery
if you see, if the head is pointed from one side to the other, and if you see, just like a tent
But nevertheless, the head of the shoulder is worth moving for your work.
After pressing the fistula, it becomes swollen and the pus comes out, and the bone is loose; and if it is closed, if the wound, and carries the bowels out forcefully
then put on the hot cautery and hold your hand over the wound to the part of the nail not covered in oil, so that your hands do not tremble; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil and corrupt it.
If you approach the fire cautery from the outset to the bone, that would be good. If this does not work, repeat the cautery once more, and if you have done it well, and leave it for three days.
After I put on a wet cloth in the pit, and the cure of drying up is finished when it is healed, and when forty days have passed and it is not healed, I put on an caustic medicine until the bone is exposed. and do the same as is appropriate in this chapter.</start_of_turn>
And there is a manner of cautery of fistula that none of the ancients have mentioned. Then comes fistula, and open the vessel.</start_of_turn After that I put in the slit I hold the substance of which this is the form.</start_of_turn and I do the quantity of three ounces of lead.</start_of_turn and keep your hand or substance firmly closed, and do not move the patient in any way, until the melted lead has run out.</start_of_turn
And it is recommended to put upon the patient a soft cotton swab soaked in oil, in the area of the wound or the swelling.
If the swelling is like that of a fistula, and the surrounding area is pale with marvelous cleanliness.
And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, then it is well. And if not, if it is necessary, administer an incision to the neck, and bring the fistula back to its proper place as it is appropriate in its own place.
wounds in the liver Many times there occur cracks in the limbs which are called "hair", and sometimes in the limbs of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the sections, and the cure does not help, then you should burn [the area around the crack] with a small cautery knife according to this shape:
And keep the patient quiet in these cavities until the swelling subsides;
After the wound has healed, the limb must be kept sound
When the swelling comes to the root of the limb or the nail, or in the palm of the hand, or in the heel, or in the root of the teeth, after that it causes putrefaction and swelling and becomes a fistula and you must treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it will not benefit him. Therefore it is necessary that you perform the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula. After the swelling or bursting of the fistula, and hold your hand until life returns to the front or back of it
and do it once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatment, until it is healed
and if it is healed thus, it is good and if this is not the case, if you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your book
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines which do not help, then put the patient’s head in your sound health After the burn, the cautery is made as before in a part similar to when you put a bandage on a tooth.
and put the cautery deep into the flesh immediately, and hold for as long as the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth;
then release your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish
then fill the patient’s mouth with clean salt, and hold for an hour and a quarter hours.
And in part therefore it remains moving if confirmed, and the joint softens restrains, and the moisture corrupts dries.
And in part therefore it remains moving if confirmed, and the joint softens restrains, and the moisture corrupts dries.
When there is pain in the tooth from cold, or if there is cold or heat, and the medical treatments do not help, then there must be recourse to cautery in two ways: cautery of soot and cautery of fire.
Cautere of burn if it is such that you grasp burn of barley, and the end in a spoonful of iron or of raisin; Cautery of burn if it is such that you grasp burn of barley, and the end in a spoonful of iron or of raisin; after take cotton and wrap over the tip of a tent, and the boil in burn built, and put on the painful tooth immediately and hold until it is cooled.
and thus do it often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so much moisture of wool and cotton in burn frothed, and put on the painful tooth, and put on the burn iron until the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
The burn cauteries together fire if it is such that you grasp one can of iron or raisin, and be large if the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient.
After the burn, the cautery must be formed anew; then place it upon the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down.
Repeat this action often, for the pain will be severe either today or tomorrow.
And you must ensure that the patient fills his mouth with thick mucus in the haste of this cautery, and then hold firmly
This is the form of the cautery
Make the cautery as you wish, and as you please;
This is the form of the leech
And the size of the perforated abscess and the moisture, if they are lighter, because they are of little blood. And if some of these abscesses or heads or there is no moisture, and these are the ones I cauterize or head of an old woman; and I find the abscess as a solid stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if there is no blood in it, we must make just as good a wound as if it were a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads, forasmuch as these which come from the spleen and from the roots of the ears, it overtures if it is always dependent on the liquid, because of the swelling; and we must cure it as it should be. When the boils are full of moisture and cold phlegmas, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then you must burn the cautery again; this will produce two wounds on the other side of the abscess to draw out the fumes from the cautery
And place the cautery above the abscess once, or if it interferes, until it reaches the front of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, put the cautery on according to the quantity of the abscess and leave it in place for three days. And put on moist cotton in the burrow until the abscess is healed;
After treating the wounds and boils until they are healed
When moisture overcomes the channels due to cold complexion, then you must first relieve the patient with soothing medicines
After that, make the cautery at the root of the throat, and keep that you do not go further than the throat, and do not burn more than necessary
After that, do another cautery at the joint of the collarbone at the head of the scapula, and let the cautery which is called "claw" be as it is seen before.
and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
When all diseases of the pores are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and the disease is ancient, if you do two cauteries on the forcele in the veins.</start_of_turn and another cautery between the two nipples.</start_of_turn
and let the cautery which is called "claw" be as it is seen before.</start_of_turn
And if you see it, perform cautery in the area where the cautery is called "points," for in this case it is like that in the disease of the ears.
and let the points be until XXX, or until they are darkened.
After that, cure the limb as we have said before, and let the cautery be three times according to this form.</start_of_turn
And for this reason the cauteries are lighter, because you make two at a time.
De la dislocation de l’ajutoire.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Then keep the patient lying on their back and on their side then hold the thumb that is inside the ear with your left hand
and if the joint is loosened, if it has two nails, prick the cautery which has two nails in it:
cauterize the thumb until it penetrates the skin, and comes out with three cauteries together
And for this reason, the cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, because the figure of the cauterization lies in three cauteries.
and the nerves are in accordance with the subtlety of a limb, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves.
And never is the suture placed upon this nerve for there are six cauteries there.
After placing the cautery on the broiled hairs with oil; then rest the patient, and do not move the limb long enough until it is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated below, whatever the cause, then make a cautery on the thickness of the claw cautery, or several pricks.</start_of_turn
For the joint is closed, and the bone is moistened, and the patient is cured.
When in the stomach come cold and moist things as long as they take their complexion, and multiply the diarrhea to him, and are customary methods of cure, and it does him no good; then it is only right that the patient should be treated on his back, and extend his legs and arms. And thus make three cauteries: one at the heel of the bone towards the palm of the hand for the quantity of a thumb, at the root of the cautery, and two at the sides as far as the figure of the cauteries makes three angles, and has a space between each other that they do not touch each other when they will be boiling together;
And let the cautery be so that it grasps two parts of the hair root at a time; and let the figure of the cautery be as follows:
And if you see the cautery being made with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
and that the one who has fear of this cautery, cauterize on the point and sign on the stomach just as much as you see of the hair; Then cauterize all the hair which is called “points”.
After the treatment of the cure that we have had before, as long as he is sane.
When the liver comes with pain of cold and moisture and great swelling, as when it is forced from its natural complexion by the superflux; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and he does not benefit from it, if you do not command the patient to be healed on his habit and the sign of the third degree [cautery] is three cauteries done in this form and this figure and this quantity upon the liver, to drive away the hypocondria, lying or causing the spleen of the man to come.
and there should be an interval of the thickness of a barley between each cautery and let the cautery be long as the nail of the thumb, and do not put your hand too close to the cautery
and be only as red as half of a hazel, and let the patient be still over his parts;
and if he cannot, whether he is lying or sitting, extend his legs and keep his arms still;
If you are tempted, if you cauterize these sensitive cauteries, if you are subtle and prudent in the art, and take care that you do not burn all the hair, for you will burn everything. If you do not stop, because the hair is too subtle in this place, and the tweezers to see.
When it has burst into the liver, and you know if it is in the fat of the liver or in the flesh: if it is in the fat, the patient feels little pain;
And if it is in the armpit, it feels severe pain.
When this treatment is finished, if you command the patient to rest their head;
and then hold their eye steady or their wound closed, and then rekindle the cautery which is similar to a flame, for in this way it is formed: Burn the cautery until the hair is charred, and let it remain until the wound has healed completely; until the hair is quite black;
after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds as long as it is healthy;
and do not let anyone else use this cautery except for one who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by whom these diseases have never happened before
Therefore he must be very cautious, and in my opinion it seems that the matter is worth letting go of
of the pleura.
The ancient said that we must make liberal cauteries of the roots of aristologists, and in part moderately. Take a long aristologist root, the greatest you can find, and let it be dry, and be as thick and long as your thumbs; And soak it in oil, and press it on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the thumb and the little finger, and two small cauteries under the beard area.</start_of_turn>
And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the hip bone, declining behind a mark.</start_of_turn And one cautery on the heel, and another on the stomach, and one between two ribs, and two as two ribs below the cautery which is between two ribs.</start_of_turn
Do not press me hard, but open your hand just as if smelling.
And let no ancient man tell you that no man uses the fire cautery like a barber, and the scraper and the needle between the ribs, until it comes to this incision; And he leaps away from the pain, as we have said in the incision of the liver.
But in this work is fear or the patient is dead now, or an fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of mice
When you cure the disease of the mouse from what we have said about the divisions of the cures, and it does not profit, then there remain two methods of cautery that are good.
Take away the skin if you will that you make three cauteries or four, covering according to the length of the hair, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver that we have said before
And do not press me hard with the cautery, but open your hand just as if smelling.
And another method of cautery is if you eschew the cautery that has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
And hold the nerve that is at the point where the patient’s pain comes from, or be the elevation which you support the nerve according to the nerve, according to the length of the limb, and the cautery should be according to the width of the limb.</start_of_turn>
Then after that, burn the two nerves until the nerve is felt from the other side, and then draw out the cautery, and there will be three in it.</start_of_turn
And if you see that you have cauterized all three nerves.</start_of_turn
After that, when the burn has a long tension by its weight, and this is as much as the other burns previously mentioned.
The burn is not worth the lye, except for the method which is called "asclytes".
When you treat according to the methods we have said in the divisions, and your treatment does not benefit him, then you must make four cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two behind the shoulder blade on the spine, and one on the hip. or be the cauteries very close to the edge of the wound.
After leaving the cautery open for a while to drain pus, do not leave the treatment with the patient after the cautery and the two incisions will be reunited with the help of God.
The shape of the belly cautery is the nail that we have before showing it. And if for the back it is olive-shaped, as it is seen before.
When the parts are swollen towards the hypotropic, and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back between the auriculacle and the ring finger And hold your hand with the cautery towards that side
Do not enter too deeply into the wound, otherwise you might burn away the thick yellow bile; and let the cautery be as it should be shaped
Then make two cauteries in the groin at the base of the little toe And let the cautery be long, one from the front of the knee and the other from behind, between the leg
And leave the cauteries over a long distance, so that the bile escapes
After the treatment of the other cures that we have mentioned.
When cold and moisture come together in the belly, as long as the retentive and digestive virtue which is the stomach and intestines is emptied, and cannot be cured by means of treatment; you see the patient groaning with great suffering and strong virtue, if you make a great burn on the stomach as it has been said above or a burn of the stomach, the burn circulates and three burns around the spleen at every burn nail, and two burns on the flanks
If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the navel and on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one; for the cure is beneficial when there is good assistance.
If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the navel and on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one; for the cure is beneficial when there is good assistance.
When hemorrhoids are deep-seated, or single or multiple, and are old and are composed of thick cold and moist humors, they are cured as we have said in divisions, and it is of no use to make burns: III above the spine of the back, this which is all detached from the marrow and in triangulating, and I cauterize the marrow II two;
And if you think that the stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling of the face, then you must make a great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the nails of the cautery.</start_of_turn> And leave the cautery open for a long time taut.</start_of_turn> After treating the limb until it is healed.
When you have finished, if you see that the cautery seems to burn, then take hold of it and put it all ablaze on that which has been cauterized.</start_of_turn And I leave the hand as long as the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, so that it does not move without support.
Do this once or twice, and if there is mucus in the mouth, if you cauterize each as we have said. after the treatment of beneficial ointments while they are still healthy;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the flesh, it will have more great benefit.
When the patient cannot endure the size or opening, as we have heard, if any ailment comes to pass that can only be cured by cautery
When no fistula comes, and is swollen and emits putrid and moist corrupt matters, if the physician has made every attempt with a subtle touch, and keeps that the wound should be closed with all the force that it has, even if it causes damage.
After flushing out the cautery which appears to have grasped, and holding it in the fistula according to the amount that it has entered, and resume the cautery as long as the flesh is stiff and corrupted is gone, once, or twice, or three times, according to the amount of damage needed;
Et te gardes d’avoir de l’ardeur aux nerfs qui sont enqui, et des grandes veines.
And take care to have no excessive heat in the nerves that are entangled, and in the great veins. For if there is a fistula between the bladder and the intestines, if you take care of these things, and do not make this fire burn too fiercely, and think that it is not necessary;
then cure the wound until it is healed, and if the matter is solidified, and the things are long tense, then you must know that the wound is completely healed.
and if the matters are not solidified, soak that the limb is relaxed, and corrupt the bone at its root; and thus with one of these things that we will say about its limb.
When pain of the foot comes from rain, and great windiness, and does not take hold of a woman, then you must apply the cautery to the nails from one side and from the other to the nail cautery which we mentioned before.
and if we cauterize in the middle, if there are three cauteries in line, it will do more good
Of the bladder. When the bladder is full and weak from pain and moisture, if the patient holds back the urine, then you must cauterize on the lower part of the bladder where the hair begins, and I have to the right and I have to the left, and make several cauteries as long as one inch;
and make one posterior cautery on the back, or two if you need to
And let the cautery be applied to the navel as afore said.
When the weather is cold and wet, and does not permit to stay indoors without discomfort, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings are late; and when they come, if they cause great pain: then you must make three cauteries around the belly, as we have said, or cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back;
and let the cautery be applied to the navel as afore said.
When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it becomes displaced from its place, the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together
And it is found that the burn is best done when the patient is sitting, so that if you burn the patient on the hip bone at the burn similar to a circle, and mark before the limb around the hip bone if it turns, so that the hip bone is within the circle.
And if it is to be burned like that which we have burned the stomach.
And if it is not present, make three olive-sized burns, and let the burn be as deep as all the others
and heal as long as it is sound
for the pain of the hip.</start_of_turn> When pain comes to the hip bone, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure is not worth it, the disease is old. Therefore it is proper that you purge the patient of the gross humors of foul bile, or other bones similar to them. The fire cautery is done;
and the method of performing the cautery is in two ways: that is to say with applied medicines and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is done in various ways, of which two are as follows
that you cauterize on the hip bone three triangular incisions according to this form, and make good depth and great, and there be between each incision an interval equal to the thickness of two nails, and the incisions are of olive oil
Never make the fire cautery on the middle of the thigh, for there are always four according to this fashion:
Never make the fire cautery on the middle of the thigh, for there are always four according to this fashion: and if you see that the cautery is done in a circle as we have said concerning the dislocation of the thigh.
but make it partly so that the circle contains the whole thigh, and that all the thickness of the knee is as before.
And this is the manner in which it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the leg
And if it comes up to the hip and the leg, if two cauteries are made like this or the patient says that the pain is still there, and one cautery below the ankle three times more, on the left side twice;
and either the cautery is too superficial or the thickness of the knee is too great
If the patient feels that the pain extends up to two palms or almost to the elbow, if he feels pain of three points or four at the cautery which is called "points". If the patient feels that the pain extends up to two palms or almost to the elbow, if he feels pain of three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
And if he feels that the pain extends from the knee to the thigh, if he feels pain at the blunt or circular cautery, and he must take good care in all his cauteries that he does not leave the cautery on the skin for too long, nor does he burn the nerves and great arteries, and that he does not cause the patient more pain and contraction.
And I myself have seen several people who have made an incision on the ankle over the bone, and left it until the leg was entirely limp, and the bone was fractured and corrupted throughout the bone After a solution of the belly from which death often results.
And if the pain is in two equal parts together, make the cautery in both of them, according to this manner.
And he says concerning the groin cautery, since this is the manner, make I like this with the head at the level of a large navel of the doctor, or less, and with interspaces and be between the interspaces as much as the quantity of a nut of peas
And let the beard grow over two parts, and be like nails, and I have a fistful of iron well made.
This line is not provided in the given text, so I am unable to translate it.
And let the bandage be as long as the thigh is red and soft, and then put it on the box of the painful limb, and let the heel be turned towards the healthy side
And let the burn once the burn is finished and leave it for three days. Then make an embolus of wool, and leave the wound open long and tense. After the treatment of the swelling when it is healed
Albucasim says that our customs often cause this burn because of its great heat, and we see many who use it
And all this comes from burnt bones, which can suffer and endure it.
And all this comes from burnt bones, which can suffer and endure it. If you make an instrument of tweezers between the teeth in which the marrow of the bone escapes, or of iron with a flat end, and in its height there are two nails, and between each there is the quantity of fat of an egg. And be open above and below, and join together according to this form:
Then put on the hip box of the patient lying on the ground over his costal rib, and press your hand on the hip box; Then pour between the two circles of the warm aw that is burnt by fire I put it, and I leave it for an hour without tension, and I suffer the patient the heat and the burn of it.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When the cautery has passed, hold the hand with the instrument and lift the hair bundle gently, and leave it for three days, and put on butter until the black of the scab becomes osteitis. and leave it for three days that corruption is extracted from it
and this would be the last remedy after the treatment of wounds as long as it is healthy
and if the pain has spread as far as the thigh or as far as the leg, make an instrument that will hold the hair according to what you have done in the hair bundle;
It is the way of the learned men of our time, and I have written or treated of the rectification of medicine. Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot. or if there is a slight loss of blood, that the point of a knife can enter;
or if there is a slight loss of blood, that the point of a knife can enter; and put that vessel in another vessel well plumped, and put lime, salt, and soft wax upon it, until there is one-third of an inch of powder remaining that you can easily grasp with your hand
and leave it until it descends with water and blood or vessel plumped, then take away all that wax and pour it upon salt and lime as before
And thus if there is much water and it is administered in the mouth of works of medicine and in cauteries of other members.
For indeed, the ointment of saffron with fumus, and if there are other medicines which we cauterize well, such as mastication of gum and honey and beeswax with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galiens tells us of a cure by which some honourees were cured of the pain of the groin and sciatic nerve, and he says that no other cure was done for them, and that they were healed at once when they had made this cure, and he bathed as he is taught afterwards.
And thus take two handfuls of green and dry comfrey, and grind them with a little fat, and put on the loin and thigh and leg where the pain persists, and bind it
and leave it for three hours and as much as the patient does not feel the burning sensation
And then make him enter or bathe as much as the limb is relaxed, and when he has entered or washed, the pain will go away and be healed
And ointments that no one must use with such medicines, except after the evacuation of pus.
Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a piece of chaff, if there is pain it helps with honey.
and must be done carefully. Take linen and soak it in oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb and the great toe and the other that is called the fossilemma
After taking strong pliers dry, and pressing the fire until it is charcoal, and putting it on the wool, and leaving it until it is stained.
and repeat the cautery until the hair has grown back, and do not stop until you think it is enough, until the pain is gone;
This method of cautery is called "pliers cautery".
Of the pain in the back.
When pain comes to the back, whether from sitting or from percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar things like cold spreading matter, of none of these signs is the cautery useful, for it is only for what comes from the infusion of cold matter
It is advisable after this that the patient be free from foul pus or other things, that we make it on the back, loin or where the pain is, three lines marked with an indent, and five vertical lines cauterized or more according to the virtue and the amount that the patient can endure
And let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "poins.
And if you see, make three cauteries or four at the middle cautery according to this form:
Many times this disease comes as a small wound, and the sign of its beginning is that if it is injured, it swells and swells up; fear not And you will find at the back of the spine in the loin and in us the appearance that comes after the others spines.
When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize with the fire according to this form. If the fire cautery burns some part of the spine excessively.
If you see that the cautery has burned two or three lines deep on the spine, and that the points are close to each other.
After treating the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, take care that you do not cause further damage to the nerve in haste.
of joint pain.</start_of_turn>
When the pain of joints is from moisture that is spread throughout the limb of bone, and when the pain comes from the heel, call it "podagre" properly; and when it is from cold and is cured by medicine, it cannot be cured; if it is cured by cautery in part:
Fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:
And if there is need that you prick on the face of the bone, if you cauterize with the whole cautery, we call that a “point”. Make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the limb, and let the cautery be olive oil in this form: if there are pains that reach the knee and other joints, and this happens many times, make the cautery on each knee three cauteries or four of each part, with all the olive oil.
And if you must proceed further, if you do more, but do not hold your hand firmly until the thickness of the thumb is as wide as an ass.
And if the pains descend down to the groin and back, administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, if you make points around the nail two lines.
And if there remains no pain in this area, if you make points on some joint and on the hair of the hand.
If the pains come up to the shoulders or up to the collarbones, if you cauterize some part, and make the patient take good care of himself and prescribe medicine.
For if you make him well-governed and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
When the fever breaks, and the bile descends like coals and is new, if you think that when you see it cured, that it will not return again; and that it uses things that release the belly, so that the pains descend from the belly
then you must make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm tight until the bile is repaired, and hold it at your sides, and mark on the skin the fever above the collarbone, and at all signs that it resembles half of a circle below the ears
Then he grasps the fire cautery; thus is the form:
As long as it is soft and he sweats sensationless. Then he grasps the fire cautery; thus is the form: then he grasps the hair at their root. and he holds his hand over so that they do not move back;
and he gives well the blows to the patient, and puts a cushion and a dressing on the wounds, and another on the hand that holds the instrument; and he holds the patient’s hands firmly
then he places the cautery on the sign at all your hand, and holds it straight and holds it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, if you do it again as many times as you live until you reach the bone and take care that the hair does not burn when you are doing the cautery. Do not burn it; Do not burn it; and let the patient not suffer any other harm.
And soaks that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain.
And you must know that the cauterization of veins must be subtle in accordance with the measure of the person, and of great people also in accordance with their measure
After three days of treatment with the cautery of a burn, until the scab is ossified
After the treatment of other wounds, until they are healed, and keep the patient lying down for forty days on his back until the wound is well healed.
And you must know that his movements must be quiet and slow, so that the fluid does not flow out when he moves from the bed to the bedroom
And after forty days, when he wants to rise, there appears a well-made wound, and bears it for forty days.
and has good rest, that he works little and guards against too great repletion of drink and eating, and of too high a diet;
and when he has learned this, if he is sane throughout
And I shall tell you afterwards the treatment of the tail in its chapter.
When wounds come to other parts and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow further, then you must make cautery of cautery according to their quantity, and take a third of the dose after the cure as we have said
and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with cautery at three angles according to this shape
but first sign the limb and make a line over the belly of the wound, and another at the bottom, and hold your hand firmly over the entire cautery needle.
But the first cauteries are lighter and softer.
There is no ancient pain in any limb. When pain comes to any limb, or to the hip or to wound, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medical treatment is not worth it, then it is recommended to cauterize with the cautery called "pins", and to cauterize according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its toughness and its swelling and its pain
If he is sane after the first cautery, that is well.
If so, repeat the cautery on that limb, for it is customary to burn the parts that are nearby, so that you can make the cauteries while the patient is still sane.</start_of_turn>
The disease does not yield to cautery at any time, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Can you see that it is being cauterized? Take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured as we have said in the division, and do not linger, for you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the patient, so make five cauteries on the head.</start_of_turn I hold the head anew, and the other towards the front towards the end of the beard.</start_of_turn And on the two corners, and one behind the heel;
And I leave the hand as long as the cautery approaches the bone, and as long as the scabs come out forcefully so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape.</start_of_turn>
And I perform the cautery on the mouse according to what is in front of me.</start_of_turn>
And if there is moisture everywhere; then I cauterize from these cauteries which we have mentioned before. I cauterize under the jaw and the cheek, and six on the spine of the shoulder, and one on the shoulderblade and one at the hip, and two on the two elbows.</start_of_turn And upon the shoulders, and upon the tendons of the hand, and on one side of the wrist of the hands, and on the hollows of the hands.
And beware of the nerves that are behind the heel, that you do not burn them.
And never perform cautery upon the bone of the heel, or upon the bone of the stomach, or upon the liver.
And the more you do cautery, the more you will do good, and the more you will benefit from it.
And the patients do not feel pain from the cautery if they feel it when they are well, because the flesh is already corrupted
And it must be known that the cautery must be great and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you find in the handling of things.
After treating the wound several times with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed
When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not serious, then you must perform cautery on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb;
Or let the cautery be made at a distance from the skin like a thumb in the thickness of the flesh. then hold the wound steady until it is healed.
Never do we make the cautery on the hand, the arm, or the back, at the outlet of a nerve that makes the limb numb, and if so it swells the bone;
otherwise no one should interfere except those who are knowledgeable about the limbs and the movements of the nerves from the bone
When the ailment called "albaras" is inflamed, and the means of medicine are of no avail, then make a cautery of the thumb at a distance from the skin according to the thickness of the flesh until the bone is bled and its color is changed
Then sometimes for the cure, wheat flour with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alder, each a part. Then mix them all together, or bind them with a cloth, and keep them warm until they are healed.
The cure for chancre by cautery
When a boil starts to form, and you see it stop growing, if you cauterize at the level of the circle that appears around it, all around the boil.</start_of_turn>
And all these things say that the fire cautery is done in the middle of the abscess.
And I do not think that is good, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen several times that it does not work;
And the most right thing is to cauterize around the circumference, which is called the circle, as we have said previously concerning the cautery
When anyone has an ailment which is called "adubelati", and it delays in healing or through excessive swelling that it makes or through the hardness of the patient when decrepit (that is to say too old) and there is much blood, or for fear; and you must see it haste to heal. therefore cauterize around the mouth of little cauteries by pricking. leave it like that. For it will haste to heal.
And if you see that it is perishing throughout the entire cautery, if it is hot, make the cautery smaller; for this is its form:
And put your hand in the middle of this ailment which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries perceive the pain, and be such cauteries that the patient feels relief in parts as the process of decay advances.
Then leave it be until it is perfectly healed
Another disease of this kind is called "corrodens," and is nothing other than a swelling of a limb, for it swells the limbs just as the fires swell the lines of dry things.
If you see this ailment in which you can suffer cautery all together with fire, then remove the large and small cauteries quickly, as much as it is convenient for the limb or the ailment is;
Then cauterize all over until you have eradicated all the corruption, and nothing remains except the bone itself
And then let it rest for three days, and put on the cauterized limbs a bandage soaked in oil until the cauterized parts are ossified, and all the corruption is gone
After the cure of wounds caused by these embers.
And if after three days the hair does not grow back, it is well.
And if it does not, repeat the cautery on that which is left corrupt
And this swelling has never been cured by any medicine except for the fire cautery
but every fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of the medicine that is in the section take as much as you need
portions that come as pieces. Many times it happens that when hairs grow back, a disease called “clos” appears according to our understanding, and is a great burdensome burden that causes great pain
And the cautery for this disease is done in two ways. That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery
The fire cautery is if you are ashamed of one cautery is like a pin of wool, and is made of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate the clot of all parts, and that there be subtle margins;
After the meat is put on the cloud, and bend your hand all the way into the cloud until it reaches the front of the cloud. and leave it there for three days until it starts to smell rotten.</start_of_turn> Then make an ointment of wild mallow broth with salt, and leave the ointment on all night, and it will be loosened from its roots.</start_of_turn>
Then cure the swelling by applying pressure until it is healed.
And if it is softened by discharges of urine, and many times comes out in hands and feet, if you can, bring a hot water cautery.</start_of_turn It is partly like this.</start_of_turn Take a flax or iron bowl or a needle of gut, and put on the cloud and the underside, that is to say, with bumps.</start_of_turn And put the bandage upon so that it covers all around, then put on a little pot of warm wax, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand as you are turning so that the edge of the bandage comes to the root of the wound, and you will find the warm water way down to the root.
And offer the patient a little the warmth of the warm water for an hour. Then leave it like that, and it will spread all through its roots
So do another, until you have scraped away all that is on the bone, then cure the wounds that remain and discharge the carbuncles that have formed.
When there are tremors of cold from nerves, or from a quartan fever or from something else, if you must do two or three cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades and one on the side, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery
If you leave it trembling, and hasten the healing of the cold sickness.
Sometimes from wounds appear bones bathed in pus, or boils filled with pus, which come from corrupt matter.
When you see it at first that we are making cautery upon each head of the pustule. A subtle cautery of mustard seed, or that which has its point grasped by the fire, or of long aristolochic root, or the lenticular cautery
And never do the cauteries commence until they see it according to this manner, and it does not cause them to swell forward, but is broken by the excess of which they come, and they are healed;
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood
Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; It is a great grief to extend [oneself].
And thus when this happens to anyone, if you are hasty to put your thumb on the wound of the vein, and you strain too much without calming your thumb, and that there is no more bleeding;
then put the olive cautery on fire several small and large ones until they are all red;
then I take hold of it, great or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is blocked, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your thumb there, and hold the cautery as long as it is not restrained
And if it spurts out fiercely when you take your thumb away from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take hold of another cautery that is in the fire immediately.</start_of_turn
and do not cease to do this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped
And beware that you do not cut away the nerve which is below, and that no other evil come upon the patient.
And so that without cutting the artery, you cannot well fill it again by itself when it is large, except in three ways that we have said. or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not otherwise treated, or by strong stitching with thread, or by medicines placed upon which have power to fill blood; And be bound and strained immediately thereafter.
Whoever brings about a rest of the limb by tightly draping it or by putting on hot things upon it, or other similar things, if this does not prove helpful in no way.
And if this happens to him at no time and there is no remedy or medicine at hand, you must put two fingers upon the wound of the vein as we have said, and hold them in place until they are completely closed over the wound and the vein And do not move it [the shoulder], but moisten it with cold water often so that it becomes cold as much as when it is without ice and freezes and thickens;
Make incisions in front of the place where the cautery and medicines are to be applied.
We have already said in the first chapter that in all diseases where it is necessary to apply cautery or burning medicine, we must apply the cautery and medicine, and we must examine the wound and its cause and its form
I have placed this chapter among the others because it is more convenient for me to discuss it in this way
And thus, as I begin this chapter, I must tell you, dear sir, that there is more danger and fear in this chapter than in all the previous cautery, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. Where there is doubt and fear, and in comes death.
And I warn you that you should not be rash. For in many ways people come to harm in treating. When such things come to pass, they bring with them such fear and anxiety that their limbs move carelessly from the violence of the disease, and from the greatness of their suffering; and from these things we must have fear.
And from these things one must have sense, and say: Wait, I am gone; and the disease is terrible.
I can only advise you to leave these things to those who have this custom, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not do anything rashly but prudently concerning that of which you are certain, and which you can take and leave as you please
And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is either preserved or restored;
and this will help you to achieve lasting fame, glory, and lasting memory.
Very dear son, our lords, you must understand and be skilled, and if you turn to the inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I vos ai ordonné ce chapitre en divisant par Chapitre, selon ce qu’il est devant ou Chapitre des cauteries, que j’vous ai devisé de chef jusques à pied, pour ce qu’il vous trouve plus facilement ce qu’il vous avez mérité.
When this disease comes from repeated assaults in childhood, and when the bail is too strong for the head of the child;
it does not come from any known cause that we are aware of.
I have never seen this disease except in infants, and in all those that I have seen, it has been fatal because of this, I believe it is better to leave the work in parts for treatment.</start_of_turn>
And I saw a child whose arm was completely filled with water, and the head swelling so much that he could not support it.
and the moisture was so great that it became blood, and this blood if it is gathered under the bone above the socket, between the marrow and the bone
and if the moisture is between the marrow and the bone, and the abscess is small, you must make a wide incision at the head of the bone
and as long as the moisture is corrected
and you will see the limb return to its normal shape:
If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is larger, if you make two incisions like a cross, following this form:
and if the moisture is under the bone, and you see that the head of the bone is displaced from some part, and there is pain that increases when you press with your hand from inside, and this does not go away: If it seems that you have made three incisions around the head of the shoulder according to this method:
And after the incision, drain out the moisture with all your might. After that, strain the edges of the incisions and remove the clots, and put in wine and oil, and leave for five days.
Then take out the dressing, and cure the wound with stitches and ointments, and leave the head of the shoulder well drained, and give the patient dry food until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Or another method of incision is that you look or open the greater tubercle, and gather the fluid.
For it never appears before; Never behind; Nevermore in distress; Nevermore in distress; nevermore in distress.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
and beware that you do not cover the artery; and blood flows freely, so that the patient dies from excessive bleeding and the evacuation of moisture
When there is no known disease which is called a "catarrh" of the eyes or the ear, and the disease is old, and the medical cure does not help, then the only remaining cure is to cauterize with the fire, since this will cover the arteries.
You must therefore take care, not to cover them, that the patient makes a second dislocation after you have rubbed the limb with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then straighten the patient’s neck with all your might Then look whether the vein is bleeding, and the blood from one and the other side is behind the ears, and they are returned;
Then see the bloodstained wound, then close one and the other with a sharp needle of two parts, as long as the vein is wide up to the bone, and that is as far as the large pulp of the head
If you see that, withdraw the sponge from the artery and tie it below, cutting as much as .ij. inches across the vein.</start_of_turn>
And when the vein is tied, if blood spurts without stopping, continue to bleed upwards.</start_of_turn
And if the artery does not bleed on inspection, if you must measure the amount of the space of three fingers, then close with a needle and do so until the bone is reached
and what must be done with the blood is to put force if it is six fingers, and sometimes more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the refilling of the artery
Then look at the wound. If it remains on the bone with a swelling, if the wound gapes widely, then strain the wound and hold it still, and cure it with oil until it is healed.
If the artery does not open upon feeling, if it is thought that two fingerbreadths suffice, mark the spot and hold it firm until bone is reached; for what is to be done with blood that will be shed if more than two fingerbreadths are needed, or less, as the patient can bear, and the refilling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains over the bone point where the stitches were placed, if the wound edges do not meet, then strain the wound and tie it off, and cure it until it is healed. When ancient dropsy comes, and acute swelling, because of the moisture of tears and the choleric humours in the temples and the ancient saliva is lost, and similar things, and it is cured by means of medical treatments and all that does not help, if the arteries of the temples are extracted and cauterized, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And as for the extraction of hair if the patient has repeated the growth of hair on his temples, and understands the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and is not closed like in some people who are too hairy;
And if it is closed, strain the patient’s neck with some cloths, then rub the limb of no rough hair, and raise the limb of warm water until the artery opens clearly Then take the sponge which is like this: Then hold the skin loosely until you reach the artery, then pull it up with hooks, and remove the nails that are below the fleshy part.
And if the artery is thin, if the vein has its tip at the root of the bone, then cut off that part as much as necessary.</start_of_turn> For if it is not fixed, if it leaps out without hesitation.
And take out six ounces of blood, up to three.</start_of_turn
And if the artery is large, it is sufficient to ligate it twice with a strong silk thread, so that no blood flows in front of the healing of the wound, and let the blood drain out naturally.</start_of_turn
Then cut off the surplus that is between the two lines in that hour, and then if you see that the bleeding has stopped, if you burn with the cautery needle until the wound is closed.</start_of_turn
And it is known that the malady is dull and languid, when the patient has no fever and is of fair complexion. For the cautery is useful for finishing off moisture: because it is more effective for moisture.
or it is useful for extracting arteries that are filled with much blood and put on good tension;
and when they are released, if they are cured by dry medicines that cause new blood to grow, and by tension, until they are healed;
and if without stopping the artery as much is said above, if you rush to cover it with cautery, or if you use the substance of vitriol and strain your hand, it will be stained If you do not have this [present] on hand, put out the limb you must until it is relaxed; and raise the limb with cold water until it stops, and hold it strained as it should be.
And must have between the two cuts one must have of great spacing, and then when you have signed the two bones, and you must let the burn the flesh burning over until it comes up to the bone, and close the vein in two bones.</start_of_turn And must be pushed away between the two bones because it is not firmly soldered from this cautery at all.</start_of_turn
And thus is the form of fire cautery:
And that which is more rigid and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting through two parts, but the cutting must be well spaced in order to keep it longer lasting.</start_of_turn> For when the instrument is too tight, it holds less heat.
The fire cautery must have between the joints a space of one inch. Then, when you have marked the area with ink, let the loop of the instrument rest burning over until it reaches the bone, and press the skin in one inch of the loop. Let the loops be spaced between the joints because they are not soldered by this cautery in any way. This is the form of the fire cautery. And thus is the form of fire cautery: when the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are above the root of the head, and it does not avail much of medical treatment in this case, you see the patient's face grimacing, and he feels pain or fear of walking as if with fear. and if they are tense and moist if the hair of the paper is cut, and they are scorched by the tears, if there is any hope of this treatment. And they call it the old "contusion cure," and you must make the patient who has this disease let the hair grow out over his face, and then make three incisions or equal front according to the length of the face;
And they call it the old "contusion cure," and you must make the patient who has this disease let the hair grow out over his face, and then make three incisions or equal front according to the length of the face; And it may be that one of the wounds has swallowed all the fat from the front as far as the jaw, and the others two have two ribs under the papers, and you must avoid incisions of the arteries that are under the papers.
And hold your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and if there is a wound there, take hold of the amount of three thumbs to cross joints;
And provide a piece of sponge and cloth there to soak up the blood, and then bind the sponge tightly with two fingers of the hand that is the shape:
of the incision which is over the temple up to the second incision. And stretch out all the nerve that is between the two wounds to all the surface that is over the bone, then do the rest of the wound up to the other second, and then take out this bandage. If in the first fissure the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and is very well cut on one side, and on the other side is soft, do not cut deeply, for that is the form:
And place the cutting edge of the scalpel towards the outer side of the shoulder at the joint, and hold the cutting edge towards the bone, and hold the handle until it reaches the middle fracture line.
And take all the vessels that descend from the head as far as the incision is continuous until it reaches the opening of the vein, and then the rest make in the middle fissure until the other side of the wound.
Then take out the blood equally, and express the limb for the blood taken out.</start_of_turn>
Then put in the wound a piece of cotton cloth and put on wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and in herbs, and keep that the wound does not bleed.</start_of_turn
And after three days remove the limb, and bring great healing plants of aquatint, then cure the wound basally with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
When no acute burning comes, you see the pupils fixed and dilated, vomiting, and paper turning brown. the hair grows thick and curly, and when they prick at their root, they cause pain that is like fire, and the patient spits out blood.</start_of_turn> therefore these matters and the burning cause these evacuations, which are not due to other veins, and they bring relief rather than harm.</start_of_turn
And instruct the patient to recline his face, then make a great incision from ear to ear, and another one wide here below. From the left temple to the right temple, and from the incision up to the bone.</start_of_turn and hold your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move with swaying.</start_of_turn
and when the bone is discovered, empty all the blood out with a sponge, and then loosen between the two layers of the incision and put in cotton wool, and try to hold it in place.</start_of_turn Then lie down under the damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep your posterior warm.
When it is stiff, if you must, rub the bone until it begins to grow, and then treat it with drying things, which makes it swell up.</start_of_turn>
Part of this manner: Take two parts of barley flower and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice.</start_of_turn> And apply it to these wounds to make them swell up throughout.</start_of_turn>
Regarding the ear swelling,
Everything that is heard in the ear is one of the three things:</start_of_turn or barley, or barley chaff, or stone, or other things like iron.</start_of_turn or semen, if like seeds, fever, pois; or things that flow freely if like water and ease and similar things.
When he pricks in the earlobe or any other way that does not fit with the ear, do not believe in the ear, but put the ear to the sun.
If you see the stone, if it distills no purple oil or sesame oil, then mix in extraction; and make it spit out the contents, and hold the nose when it spits, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool and extend the ear downwards
Many times comes forth from this cure;
and if it does not come forth, mix in extraction as subtle as possible, for this is the form
If the fire burns too fiercely, it causes wounds; it is good.
Otherwise, if it does not consume the base of the hair, it necessitates excision of the hair follicle of small double curvature.
and if it does not burn at the base, make a mark at the root of the hair or pluck out the hair from the earlobe, and press that which is around the root of the hair so that it does not go inside with the hair then the fire will burn further, because many times it comes out as we have said
and if it does not come out completely, take hold of the limb and put on no instrument that will cause damage, and put a pad of cotton around it Then press the buttocks against the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forcefully.
If it does not happen from all these things that we have said, if you rush to cut the ear immediately as we have said, there will be spasm.
and the manner of the incision is that if you do it first for the well-being of the head, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear downwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fat or bone depending or so that the incision be like the moon, as long as you reach the bone, and the bone according to your will, and suck the blood profusely from your mouth
And the treatment is as long as he is healthy.
And if it is grains that are bruised and swell, if you administer extraction;
and if it cannot be cured, if you must give an emetic according to this form: mix in incision of that grain.</start_of_turn>
But do not do this until you believe the grains are moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many attempts;
then extract with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
When the ear aches, then the patient must put on a condensor at first, and fill the ear with much cotton. And be it without on that ear or the pain is there already. If it is burst through that, that is good
if this is not the case, take many pieces according to the length of your desire and hold them tensed and limp, and burn them all in the fire; And put the patient's ear in his hand, and take his jaw from the other side, and hold his cheek with the other hand on the cheek that is in the ear. Do not cease to do this movement from thumb to thumb until the pain has passed, and when it leaps it will be all gone.</start_of_turn>
And if you see, take hold of the joint, and hold one of the heads in the ear, and the other head press with fire until the pain in the joint is gone.</start_of_turn
Then do the rest of the joints until the pain has passed, as we have said concerning the thumb.</start_of_turn>
In the extraction of the stone, if it is of little bulk, if like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division.</start_of_turn
But if it is of great size, it can be felt, and necessitates the extraction of teeth. And this is the lighter thing to remove from the ear.
When extracting worms from the ear, when you have cured as we have said in the division, or when treating distillations, the cure does not benefit me, if you do not look at the ear in the sun: if there are no worms, if you have extracted subtle teeth, and if they do not appear, take the tweezers accordingly, for this is the shape
And let the wound be broad and deep. And keep the most subtle head in the ear according to the quantity of the patient’s suffering, then succeed with all the tweezers; Leave the hair long and even; if you prick at its root, keep your eyes steady until they grow.
And if they do not obey by this, if you press into the cotton wool as I have said in the stone;
and if they do not come out with force as we have said, if you administer distillations that the former have experienced in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat them with distillations.
and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, as you see: Or of silver or gold, these are the little ones that are lost, and over these you must distill;
and for pressing within the distillation to these instruments of gold well made for this, and if you see me take a scraper and wrap it around the tip immediately with cotton wool; Then I pour out my oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the can, and the can should be in the ear.
Then I press from the armpit to the heel over the whole coat, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or almost out of the ear. And when you feel the patient is relieved, and the distillation is finished, do not leave the fire until it has cooled in the ear And keep it from getting too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.
Regarding the ear swelling,
No child is born without some hole in their ear
and the same thing happens at home by bursting of wounds, or of hair growing in the ear, and these bursts never come without leaving a mark in the ear if we do not see them
And never has there been a time when I did not fear for my life, and I saw them all well.
When the cause of the patient’s pain comes to light, if we are unable to see it, it is a sign of serious illness in many cases; and in this case, it is clear that you put your ear close to the patient’s ailment in order to hear it. Look inside: If you see the swelling apparent, if the limb has become completely limp and rigid, this is its form:
So be vigilant from front to back, so that it does not burst open; for if you do not heed it, your ear will bleed
If the swelling is of cartilage or bone of the ear, if you hold it tightly with slight pressure, while that bone is still fleshy.
And if the operations are embedded in the ear, take a sharp scraper of the finer kind and burnish a little at the fire, then put in or remove the earwax.</start_of_turn
If you feel the tingling which the patient feels at the ear, prick slightly, and keep your fingers from the ear;
Then put in the ear a plug according to the size of the hole, and the wool in an Egyptian position. Do this without moving until the wound is healed, or you take a plug and wet wool, and powdered vitriol broth
and if you see the ear fleeing, if you can, remove the plug and put another plug made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is bony Then treat it until it is healed.
If blood vessels swell, immerse a sponge and wring it out in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that are useful for stopping blood flow which is causing the swelling.
Thus all these things come out of paper when the eyes are moist and dry; if you can extend them with nails and pins, and press with a spatula from their roots Then take out the glass vial filled with broth.
And if there is no change, if the burn is done with a lenticular caustic substance and the burner does it after the incision is worth moving the limb immediately.
and often it is repeated, cannot anything remain from its root; When they are burned by fire, if they are burnt to the root, they do not return again
From the grease. Often come out on paper scraps things that seem greasy in their form and in their hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "granule", and is an accumulation of large moisture in the substance of the skin and bones; The work is like this:
The work is like this: Take care if the great swelling moves from one side to the other, for it is an easy matter to know.
Make the great swelling swell up completely, then gently massage the chest piece, then take hold of it firmly with your fingers and hold it steady.
If you do not perceive any improvement in the patient, do not grieve; for nothing is more grievous to the patient
and if the fracture is great, if you assemble with a bandage, and keep it until it is healed;
and if it is small, do not use force, for it will soon restore itself and bring relief
If the great swelling is descending into the ear towards the upper part, reverse the blood flow, and stretch the swelling with one finger, and hold and press from one side to the other
And if the marrow is loosened by the incision, it matters not.
And when the marrow is cut, let the oily liquid of the wound flow out, and heal the limb of that which engulfs hair until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the tears Pus is a greasy substance which is enclosed in layers of paper, and this happens more often to those who are poor, and causes great pain to their eyes, and they come to have a discharge of tears in the mornings, and they cannot look at the sunlight because of this
And because of this, they lie with their faces downwards, and sleep on their backs, and their papers are wet with moisture which causes them to swell and appear covered in pus And when you press the limb towards your chest and feel the wax between the bones.
And thus the work is such that the patient places his head in his throat.
and then takes a fold of linen, and makes a loop in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the excess of flesh from the chest, and puts it on it. and presses from both sides, so that the excess is assembled in the circle
then makes in the middle of the moisture at the trenching of a large wound, and is not to be greater than the wound made to the vein;
and makes the skin in a wound as long as you see the excess; and in many cases comes excess from the wound, according to the shape of a piece of white fat
Remove the thumb completely at a right angle between your two thumbs, and bend your hand to the left and to the right as much as possible.
And keep your fingers from being cramped in the crease, that you do not move them at all until the thumb has grown to the tip of your finger, that you do not bleed.
If it does not emerge from the base of the crease, if you see a little piece of bone at the base of the crease, gently open the crease again until it emerges.
Then remove it as we have said, then moisten the bandage and the surrounding area, and put on the limb, and support it.
And if in such houses where they bruise themselves and put on to corrupt the moisture which is remaining
Then the cure as long as it is healthy
If it comes to the vein being cut, if the cure of closing wounds is applied as soon as it is sane.
paper hair When paper nails grow long, do not clip them except as nature dictates, and keep them clean; for if you clip them, the blood will clot, and brings on various diseases like tears that are usually associated with inflammation and softening of the nails and glue, as much as this is the cause of the clotting of the blood
And it is the cure in three ways: Or by whole-body cautery, or by water-medicine as it is before or alongside the fire cautery, and is done by incision and suture or by ligatures, as I shall say.
You must put the patient’s hand on your left side, then turn the palm of the hand towards you;
If it is bent, that is good; If not, if you see a splinter under all its threads; then either pull out the margin of the palm or the hair will be born from these hairs, and pull out the thread from under all of it, and turn the palm up again.
Then make in the armpit the papier, the hairs close together, at all the expanse encompassing, from the great to the small;
Then draw out the thread, and put under the paper a little attempt of cotton and bandage, then mark on the paper a figure like a nail, as if like the head of a nail, and thus it is known that the figure is as much as you see elevate the paper that is destined for you.
And if in a part that has suffered much, you must hold great quantity of the paper according to that which the paper is softened;
Then make at all the expanse on the two lines that you have marked, from the great to the small; And if it be one of the wounds near the hair root in the thickness of a radish, then one should apply the ointment to one of the two angles downwards, and then cover all.
Then assemble the two layers with a staple of a needle at every thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air the excess of threads over the two edges to all corners, as you see me do;
and if this does not suffice, if there is no remedy, then leave the staple and the threads until three days or four;
then cure the wound with a bandage of dry and constricting things, for the moisture recedes at the wound heals and the reunion of the parts, but the staple is mute (as they say the old ones), and this is work with fear. And if in another way:
And if in another way: And if in another way: if you mark the mark of a figure which is like the foot of a myrtle, as we have said, at three inches distance from each other according to the shape that is here.
Then hold back what is above with small forces evenly according to the form which is here.
And if you do not have the nails to hold it, and the thing is not quite equal, if you take a needle or there is a thread, and the thread will be in the mark; and join the other thread with great loop, and the second thread with a small loop, and assemble between these two the threads equally.
then hold your hand equally, and hold all the leather over which you have marked, as we have said, and assemble the two layers of the wound by stitching, and cure until it is healed
And if the incision comes to your wound, if the surrounding area is apposed with certain cerotes and similar oily substances, it will be soothed.
And never has it happened that the hairs of the patient have been converted:
since you must use what we have said about the incision.
but the costure in one and the other is more artificial
The cure for these wounds is in this form: and that you convert the hair and the root according to what I have said, and then make two incisions by art, and two sutures as long as the hair and the surrounding area is wide; and grasp as two cuts of two parts or hold the threads;
Then assemble one with the other smoothly above what rests on the marrow of the oil, and strain the two thumbs of the two parts forming. And leave it in place for a while, and the skin which is strained will tear and fester and swell, until it recovers by itself.</start_of_turn>
If it is delayed, if the pain has become great, then cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And when the wound is closed and the marrow is raised, and the hairs do not prick, they will not grow again.</start_of_turn
And this is the form of the two thumbs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and breadth.</start_of_turn
The work is such that you grasp a subtle needle, and there is a thread of silk subtle. then gather the threads and knot them together subtly, and if the length of the threads is long enough, make a palm of length
then order in the chase another thread of silk briefly, and do not let the thread slip through the needle
then put the patient’s hand in its right place;
and if the work is delicate, if the work is delicate, because it is a subtle and fine work, then leave the sun out so that the work is not spoiled, for this is a subtle and fine work, and put the needle at the root of the hair and make it pierce in the tissue until you bring it out in the natural way
Then withdraw the hair until above the chase, and remain in the chase that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then withdraw your hand as much as the hairs vanish from the entire chase to the tip of the palm with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs no longer prick with it, if you draw the chase to the outside as you have commanded, until the chase vein bursts through and you see it through the oil sight;
Then you must draw the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair returns to its place and the mark disappears from above
And if the hair is little, if accompany one long hair naturally, and leave it with that or leave it alone, until it is elongated and then retain it
from the putrefaction of the oil When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes into the oil, if there are two methods:
When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or putrefaction comes into the oil, if there are two methods: one natural, and the other unnatural.
And comes from the wound, or from a burn or from cautery, and from similar things.
And the way of working in this case is that you make that suture, dry the flesh of it, put in linen threads, and leave it until it is healed;
and do not do anything except use dry and restrictive things in the treatment of it. For if you do that, the disease will return worse than before;
but you must give it soft things, such as fennel The acute rose or thistle and flaxseed should be boiled, and aquilon oil melted in none of the oils, and it should be wrapped around a bandage, and it should cure this.
If you take care of your wound, it will not swell as before
And these works that we have mentioned are not fierce except in addressing this disease, for they do not regress beyond their former form.</start_of_turn>
This disease which is of sudden onset and which truly is called "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Accidents arise from wounds, cuts, cautery, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
And the way of this work if you take an awl, if it has two threads, and the hook in the flesh, and it makes the liquid of the armpit so that the thread of the vein is split in two at the root.</start_of_turn
Then the head of the shoulder is extended upwards to the highest point, and the scapula is abducted to a wide span. And if the limb returns to its normal position as it should, that is good;
otherwise, take hold and put it into the socket, and turn the limb, and make two incisions or break the bone within the limb
and make two incisions at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make an angle so that when they are reunited, the limb should have the same shape as the letter that has not been split
then fix the head of the shoulder, according to the quantity of its bones and cartilages, of that which sustains the limb, then join the two separated parts with a silk thread.
Then comes the treatment of what we have said of soft medicines and patches, as long as he is sane.
And if the disease comes from a fracture or sprain or burn, if you must make a full incision from the hair to the skin, and as described above. Then remove between two fingers of a bandage, as I have said before.
Then remove between two fingers of a bandage, as I have said before. And you must make the work according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the wise men appear to be of all sorts as to how to return the limb to its natural shape
and the patient himself, according to what is convenient in the work and the instruments in various arrangements
When the suture comes loose at the fingers in such a manner that the thumb above is soldered with the white of an oil, and cannot move or perform its natural works, if you must, then bite the tip of a needle with your teeth and hold it high.
And extend as pinches, as much as you can cope with the thing which is at the edge of the sensitive area, which should not be too tight nor too loose, so that the patient does not suffer too much and does not spit out the oil
Or make your incision, which you must loosen, gently, so that the thumb returns to its natural position
And is cleansed entirely of the surrounding area, and do not put in any salt or vinegar, and lift up the fresh water, and of vinegar;
Then put between the paper and the oil a lint cloth, and put on the oil wool soaked in abundance of eggs. And afterwards, use a bandage doucovered with cloths and other soft things until it is healed
The nails are according to two methods: One is nervous and seems like I soft scab, and another which is not nervous, but seems like white moisture frozen, which when touched with iron and warmed up, as if by a burn, it cannot endure;
And both of them seem to commence towards the great marrow, and cross back and forth so that they cover all the eye and the light and the movement of the oil
And if the patient puts his head in his side, then hold the eyes; and keep the hand steady, then grasp the pupil as if it had small double vision, and stretch it upwards. then take a needle, and put in hair of horse, or ox, or beef, and tie it firmly; and double the point of the needle a little and pierce through the pupil, and tie the pupil with a thread and stretch it upwards, and scratch all around the pupil the costae of the pupil that lies under the edge of the iris, and leave the natural discharge or mucus, if in the incision there is no discharge of tears usually
And never has the nail extended at the cuticle alone, but gradually, as we have said. Then the swelling engulfs all the surrounding soft tissue, as in this shape:
And keep that the soft tissue does not touch the tough membrane and breaks it, and that the pulp is not perceived;
and after the incision, pour into an oil a little bit of bruised silk, and soaked in cold water, and leave it until the other evening then cure what is causing the pain until it is healed
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push out the awl, and the bone does not enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured by medicine;
And they grow as I have said in the division, and if you see them covered, if you smear oil on the patient, and take the sponge slightly moist according to this form: And they grow as I have said in the division, and if you see them covered, if you smear oil on the patient, and take the sponge slightly moist according to this form: immediately pull out the hair gently, and if you see that it has ceased and the root is pressing, if you distill from your mouth into the oil of the coliers make of litharge and red coliers and it boils, and stamp the oil until the other side is reached.
If nothing hinders you, if like an incision, if necessary, hold the milk and cure the wound first until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Then repeat the work according to this same form, until it is entirely healed.
And if there appears flesh in the marrow at night in the oil with great suffering, if you suspend it on the ointment, and cut off a part and not all, that tears of tears do not arise;
Then distill in the red colander which is made of litharge.
Then there is no red rose in the world that comes into being; cover the plumule and restrain upon the papers and burn them, and it will seem like a rose of ballast.
If the patient puts his head in his sound, then do the works; hold the eyes, and take all that has a convenient curvature for this, and support with force;
Then take the first portion, and go on taking it to the scraper until the end, and keep that you do not spill the oil during the work.
Or the incision of the spleen that we mentioned when incising the vein and have little force so that one can see the bone marrow, as it is shown in this chapter
When the incision is complete and the bones are exposed, if you employ cold sesame oil or distill collyrium rouge and similar corrosive medicines, put on lint soaked in vinegar with eggshells, so that it is firmly fixed.
If it remains immobile, and the patient’s pulse weakens, and you doubt the healing of the wound, if you leave the oil on and treat the wound with soothing things that promote healing.
Then return to your work until it is healed, and when the wounds are joined in the oil by this appearance.
However, you must know that you must alleviate the treatment with a slight amount of natural oil. And in case of an accident, in the work of fire;
And do not move your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
The red veins are covered in oil, and endure the gaze of the surgeon and absorb the oil throughout the day.
Then you must first look and see if it is swollen, because force is, and there is no other disease stronger than swelling therefore take hold of it firmly:
instruct the patient to put his head in your hand, then suspend the veins all around according to his wisdom, and do it cautiously in this form:
Red veins covered with fat, endure the sight of an eye and make the fat swell all the days. The physician must first look at the eye to see if the fat is soft or hard; there is no other disease more violent than this; therefore, the physician must do this part carefully: instruct the patient to put his head in his hand, then suspend the veins throughout their length as he deems appropriate, and let the physician double the ligature as much as he deems necessary:
then hold the veins gently, and drain the blood afterward, until you see the swelling disappear;
and keep that you do not stain the oil with specks of blood, do this work at midday in the sun, and be calm in your work if you do not cope for only the veins;
When you have done this, if you distill in the oil of colera green and red to corrupt what is remaining doubtful.
When you have finished that, if you do not collect all of that in this hour, make a plaster on the oil of calming things to soothe the pain of the eyes, and let it rest until the pain is relieved and is assured after the post-cautery; then repeat as before until you are healed.
This is the form of forces.
Moisture is called "arissati" and forms a fistula:
When you treat it with fire cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not completely healed, if there is any remaining moisture, you must open the wound on the post-cautery, drain it out, and remove all of the moisture until the bone is exposed
And when the bone is discovered, you will see corruption and blackness, if the disease has all the implements of this kind, this is its form.
And it is called "acute chief", and is made of festering flesh at the root of the head, and is pointed as with a lime when it is in this form:
And put on the limb of the decaying bone, then turn it between your two thumbs, and press your hand until you feel that the corruption is finished
Do this only once, then restore the limb of the exuding medicines.
If the wound is sutured, and there is no discharge, and the swelling of the limb is sutured, and remains for 40 days, and does not heal and is not removed, and other misfortunes do not come, say that it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If not, if there is nothing else to be done but to restore the fistula to its place without damage, do so in this fashion: If not, if there is nothing else to be done but to restore the fistula to its place without damage, do so in this fashion: uncover the bone a the second time by iron and with sharp medicines; and when it has been uncovered, take hold of the fistula according to this fashion: let the iron be at a right angle, and the fistula should be thinned out until it reaches the head as you see here.
then place it upon the bone without marrow, and wipe your hand with oil, then draw the fist completely until it breaks the bone and the patient feels pain from that which comes from that which remains in the fistula if he holds his hand on his shoulder
and as soon as the dry medicines are placed back, as I have taught you, and when the wound has healed and hardened the limb, if there is any matter in the shoulder; If it is easier for the patient.
When the eyes are wide open and there is no risk of disturbing the bowels, if it is easier for the patient, you may bind his hand.
Then do the same with the other eye, and put on a bandage or compress to stop the bleeding, then apply oil that has been scented with acacia, aloe, incense and ochre, and strain the oil, and place it on cloth patches and bandages
and leave the cloth patches in place if you take cloth patches that are soft enough, and double cheesecloth in three, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount of bleeding there is between them
then strain it out with a piece of stiff bandage, and start the bleeding again by applying the compress to the wound
Then extract the wound and leave the oil drained day and night, and if it is linked with pus, if you must, drain it with your mouth.
Then extract the wound afterwards the day and the night, and if you see the oil returning, it is well;
otherwise. if it persists, leave the dressing and the limb and the wound as long as it is well.</start_of_turn>
Dou derrompement de toile uvee. When dislocation comes in the armpit or upper arm, then open it, and bring forth paper as if there were a grain of resin; this is to be expected to see.</start_of_turn
then if you see it covered, the work is like biting a needle at the root of the limb up to this distance, then bite another needle or there is double thread of the limb.</start_of_turn And let the fire burn, and leave the first needle according to its position.
Then grasp the loop of the thread double and tie a part of the iris around, and strain well, then remove the needle and put on soft linseed oil in abundance.</start_of_turn>
And leave it until the thread has bled with the iris, then cure the oil with soothing things until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn
And never restrain the wound by the inner corner of a circle of gum until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And if the blood vessels are greatly swollen, if he pierces at the spleen with a subtle tremor that comes from the oil, correct the moisture of the albumin and drain the blood, and enter in between them quickly.</start_of_turn
Then remove it until it is whole.
This ailment which is called "alcunnati" is not fierce except for the swelling which is assembled in oil, resembling descending water, and it is not true water;
and the way of appearance of the ailment is that if you make the patient sit on a chair, and place the hand over the eyes, then take hold of the head between your hands two parts, and move it until you see the swelling coming down towards your eyes then it is either tightly bound and does not descend and breaks the light, and see the patient suffering in this way;
and if it does not descend on its own, as it should be, it is like acute pain, and if the swelling descends, it does not appear as we have said
If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula and place it on the horny tunic under the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic and the crown, as long as the bow is finished.
And when it is discharged, if distilled in hot aqua vitae mixed with honey, or in vinegar or fenugreek boiled with honey, then be cured of other treatment until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
From the belly of the oil. We have seen the signs of wounds in the division, and what it is necessary to perceive.</start_of_turn If in work according to the sanctity.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, far from the light of the sun, and apply pure oil and tighten the mouth tightly.</start_of_turn
Then put the thumb of the oil on your left hand if the eye is left, or on your right hand if the eye is right.
Then take in your right hand if the eye is left, the instrument which is called “almagda”, or in your left hand if the eye is right.
Then put the tip of the instrument below the eyebrow by the thickness of a hair at the part furthest from the tear duct, then hold the instrument called “almagda” firmly, and withdraw your hand until it touches the oil, and feel that the “almagda” has reached the empty space
And make sure that the measure of the “almagda” is at the bottom of the measure of the space from the armpit to the end of the eyebrow And this is the crown of the oil;
if you see the bone in that membrane by the clarity of the yellow corn silk, and thus put the instrument until it reaches the bone or the liquid is there, then press down the oil once it has gone down a way.</start_of_turn>
If he feels a sudden pain now, if he sees the patient before him and the instrument in his eye.
After a little rest, when the liquid returns the second time, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, if the oil has been squeezed out too much around the hand and the hand, then remove the almond gently by circling your hand around it.</start_of_turn
and then put back in the liquid a little bit of gum, and remove from that the oil from inside.</start_of_turn Then put by force the stamp or gauze soaked in rose oil and soaked in abundance of eggs, and bind with the clean oil
Yes, and those who are of our kind, put upon common broth with abundance of eggs.
And if the almagda cannot enter the oil because there are parts of bone that have too hard the veins, it is to be known that you take the instrument which is called “alberit,” which is like this in shape:
And pierce then the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make the liquid subtle, then put in the almond as we have said.</start_of_turn
And at the end of the work, the patient is shown I the sleeper coming, in which he sleeps on his back in I the gloomy night.
And if you must take all movements away, and grasp firmer meats, and do not move his head to the side or to the left, and keep him still according to his setting until three days past
then loosen in this same house at night, and remove his eyes, and let him see nothing, and then return his eye until seven days past
and you must only do this in the hour of treatment or after the incision now, but you must know that this must be done cautiously, because the pain will increase greatly
because if you do not loosen the oil before the seventh day, and address it to that which relieves the abscess;
When he is appeased, if you loosen the vein and put on his face a little cushion to cover nothing, keep it there until it is firm in that dark place.
Then go out of the house quickly and quickly, and when you arrive at your case;
stay away from them that no disciple should interfere in this matter. And one came to us from the Iraq, who told us that in the peace time they did often see women having an evil spirit cast out of them, when water was applied to them, but we never saw anything like that in our land, neither did we read about it in the books of the ancients; and it is a new thing to us.
And these are the signs of the forms of an evil spirit, for those who do not know them will not recognize them;
And let them be again in their place: And their tops are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like a hook.</start_of_turn>
And nevermore let hair grow or be cut various, for there are some which seem to have scorpion's mouths at their roots.
And if there is such a thing or if there is hair entangled of hair color, or if there is hair of marrow color. For in that case of these hairs which is marrow, and does not prick, it must be that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun
For in that case of these hairs which is marrow, and does not prick, it must be that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun and uncover his nose, and bring the ointment to those hairs, and take away the feces; Then keep that which you put under the patient's skin firm and strong from one side, until you know that that hair is entirely healed
And if nothing remains, if the wound has all of its subtle instruments lightly, if nothing stays; if nothing settles, or incisions remain open, if the edge is slippery as it should be;
if there are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the tumor is dry and the edges are solidified, then let go or do not delay in administering pain relief or wine. If it does not bleed and moisture comes up to the palate, the patient is sane;
if moisture does not flow as it should, the patient has fractured bones beneath the skin, for the instruments do not pass through without breaking them.
Therefore it is advised that you take a broad thread and loop it around the limb, and grasp it firmly with your hands, and keep between each knot no space greater than or less. and put the patient’s hand over the dislocated limb at its root, and keep smelling until it comes out through the mouth of the limb.
and many times make the child do as they are taught, and it is a light matter for one who has seen it done;
then hold the head that comes from the root with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and grasp one after the other with your thumbs as we do with a needle and thread.</start_of_turn>
Do this until you are certain that the knot has not been damaged, then pull out the thread, dry the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian balsam, and reset the limb as before.</start_of_turn
Fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char.
Do so for three days or more, until the swelling has subsided throughout. Then apply or remove a sponge soaked in wine for several days until it has healed, and if there is need for sedative medicines, use them as well.
This is the shape of the instrument for drawing out the head, from which we extract oils and medicines or not
Be of silver or gold, like an overspread lamp, like a sponge, and guide accordingly.
And if you see, make a closed sponge, and let the instrument be flat for purging the head
And he has one hand clasped at the head to hold it when we burn oil or no liquid.
From the shoulder joint on the neck.
Many times there arises at the head no disease which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large again, so that it is seen like a thing;
and therefore you must take hold at the beginning, and break the bone, then put out the fire or the burning medicine
and if you delay to take hold when it is large, if you take hold too tightly, of poor color, of faintness:
if you do not touch it with iron because it is a swelling abscess, for when you take hold of it once, there comes great harm to the patient;
And if the abscess bursts with a soft touch, not of a harsh color, you see that you can cover everything; if you see the patient vomiting and groaning in fear, cure the limb of dry and restraining things.
Do not leave the hairy growth for too long, but take out the hair at its root, wipe the blood, and moisten the hair with Egyptian balsam, and reinsert it as before; do this for three days or more, until the hair has eaten away everything that is left of the carbuncle; then put on or take off a cautery every other day until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them as well. This is the form of the instrument for purging the head, from which we distil oils and medicines or nothing.
It is therefore necessary that this does not happen at all, if you observe that the wound is fresh throughout its entirety then immediately join the two levers to a suture, and then cure until it is healed
and if the levers are already detached from one side and the other, if you can cover all the parts of their curvature until they bleed, then assemble the two levers to a suture, and tighten, and sprinkle with powdered dragon's blood and incense powder And put upon the wound a piece of dressing of great or other dressing which sticks, and leave it until it bleeds by itself, then cure it of swelling as it becomes healthy.
The method of stitching is as follows: if you assemble the solution. or by needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
from the armpits of the arms.
At home, there is in the veins a dense paste like mustard seeds, sometimes minor and sometimes greater
Therefore you must tear open the veins, and make incisions upon each knot, and take hold with tweezers and grasp in the middle part
Then apply the poultice after the incision of the vitriol, until the wound is closed.
And then leave it [poultice] easily, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healed.
Many times there appears on the gums charcoal-black spots which the old people call "albules.
If you support it [toothache], and hold the root, and let the blood flow out, or the blood clot;
Then put out the broiling vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders
and if it comes back after the incision, and comes many times, if the root comes out a second time, and cauterize it If it does not return by itself after the cautery.
Never are they assembled at the head of the dens, between the teeth in the mouth, escorces that are burdensome and rough Never are the teeth black and yellow and towards, until the corruption comes to the gum, and they are biting;
If you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head is in your hand, and open the teeth or the escorces wide, until nothing remains to be removed And thus make blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other impurities, until they are washed away
And if the bone that is at the first cause is good, it is well. If not, if it starts to slip again the second time and the third, until you have all failed;
and the teeth that they have must move in various ways, as it shows in their work, for the root of the teeth that we remove to drive out has other forms than those that remain between the teeth and these forms and others are seen with you
You must know that when you cure the tooth of its pain, you must leave it alone as much as possible, for it must not be made worse because it is a thing of great moisture so that we have no excuse for making it worse
Therefore, when the patient is constrained to endure, if you wish to be certain that he will endure. Many times the patient complains of pain, whether it is acute or chronic, and causes the limb to tremble. and never does the pain depart from him except when the evil is removed, for we have already wished to do it to these scoundrels.
and when you are well sure that it is the bone causing the pain, if you can, escort the limb to its root at all costs; keep it firm to prevent the bone from shifting from all sides
then the muscle has to be pressed towards the shoulder or the scapulae at the first moment and the second time, until they are well loosened, and then firmly bind them again and if the head of the shoulder is in its place between your shoulders, and you keep it well still if it does not move
After that, stretch the tooth outwards along the ridge; and if it does not yield, take no instruments and hold it loosely within the gum, and move it as you did before.
And if the wound is seen and bleeding, if it is possible, cover it with a cloth, otherwise let it bleed out. If the wound is bleeding slightly, do not strain too much, for it will break
It is necessary to keep the wound moist around the limb by using a swab to absorb the blood that escapes from it.
Be careful not to break it, and leave some of the root intact, and return to the patient with the greatest pain of the first.</start_of_turn>
Beware that you do not do anything rash as the ignorant do, who without haste and without courage break the limb every time and bring nothing but what we have told you
but often cause greater pain and damage to the limb due to the root of the disease or the fracture that breaks, as we have often seen
And when the disease is severe, if you bathe the limb in wine or vinegar and oil,
and the blood comes away often; so often do we see it, if you use strong vinegar, it is enough to clot the blood.</start_of_turn>
If this does not suffice, if you cauterize.</start_of_turn
The shapes of the instruments, which must be silent at first, must have long points and large handles, so that they do not double when you draw the tooth.</start_of_turn
These are the shapes.</start_of_turn And be of great size if they do not bend when drawing, and be of iron well made, and be toothed so that they may hold firmly.</start_of_turn>
of the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn> When the root remains when you pull, if you must put out the soft cotton wool in the wound I or II, as long as the wound is bleeding, because it holds the teeth that are loosened “algrophi”, so that the head of the shoulder seems like a beak of a rooster.</start_of_turn
And let the incisions be made as with a lime, and this is the form:
And if the roots do not yield to all these tensions, if you can, uncover the bark entirely around the root, and put the instrument which is called the «althali», which is to say a palanche, because of this form:
And be strong and wide so that if it does not break me, and if the root leaps over this, that is good.
Otherwise, if you aid all the instruments, so that the forms come afterwards:
And if you use this instrument which has just rain, because of this form: And other instruments which are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which seems like a great clamp, of which this is the form:
And be these instruments strong that they cannot break, and nails that are as much as teeth of the jaws are And so of other instruments, which are not counted here;
And so the master surgeon will find by himself the instrument that suits his work and the patient's disease, for there are many diseases where the old ones did not teach an instrument for the variety of things; and if it breaks not from bone or from other parts, or if it is necessary, if you seek other instruments, as I have said, and if you help with gestures, so that this is the form:
And let them be thick and firm to hold the bone, that it does not slip away, but can be held and grasped.
Then restore the limb with the appropriate medicines suitable for this case, and if there is decay in the bone, even if it is small, if the wound has all these instruments at hand.
When the teeth appear contrary to their natural course, and the form is bad, and even in women of gentle birth, if you suspect that they are decayed inside and cannot be seen externally, and are not in their proper place, they cannot be treated or comforted
Therefore, extract it; And if it is mixed with the tooth, take this instrument which has a small beak-like shape, and be like a little spear:
When the tooth persists too long in the gums and in the hands, for the duration of the tooth's hardness, and because you do not move the others, if it appears, it can be limed, if you use a file that has the same shape as the tooth
And it is also like when we make needles.
And like when we bite teeth together without gloves, if they do not move until they are pricked
then the face at the end has no relief, and if the tooth is too deep and bites the tongue, you must keep the biting teeth even until they are even, so that they do not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech
When the front tooth is loosened, by percussion or biting, and the patient cannot press on anything that hurts them except biting, you must treat them with restrictive medicines, which is not worth
if you must restrain them with a gold thread, because the silver thread becomes green and corrupts, but the pain never goes away
And let the hair be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth.
And if you see the teeth leaning, if you take hold of the hair and double it between the two front teeth, then put the thumbs between the teeth next to each other, if there are one or more, until you see clearly up to the tooth opposite; Then repeat the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and cautiously, until it does not move at all.
And let the suture be at the root of the tooth if it cannot escape.
Then grasp the thumbs with pincers, assemble them, and put them between the tooth and the tongue, and hold them there so that it does not bite the tongue
And then let him hold his limb firmly as much as he can, and if it slips or the thread breaks, if the strain of another thread.
if he should remain and serve his hold firmly, and this is the form of the teeth and the setting of the two teeth above, and the two teeth below, as you see.
When the tooth bites, if we reset it in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said;
and no other thing should intervene except moisture and ointment, and never make it the shape of a tooth of ivory, and put it in its place or withdraw it where it is wanting, and strain it as we have said, and remain and serve firmly long tension
Never is this life which comes from God or nature, that we are born without. or by the sudden blow of a deep wound;
and the work is such that you must offer the mouth of the patient, and take his head in your hand, and hold the tongue;
then cope the nerves of the large intestine, so that the tongue is freed from its bed, and if there is duration or it does not go away, and it is a consequence of a wound, if you see blood and cope the large intestine again
and keep that the wound is not too deep, for the artery which comes from there
and when you have done this, if you lift the limb of water-rose and easily, or cold water, then put the tongue back in its place with a little thread.
And the patient groans in his sleep, that his limbs cannot rest.
When blood spills forth, if you take out the glass vessel that is bleeding, If it does not stop, if you cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then you must cure it with other means until it is healed
and if you see black or red or hard pus, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is an abscess.
and if it is drooping with moisture, if there is moisture in it, if it bursts, and there comes out a white spittle, and you deliver from a part and from the other; If it does not go well at your work, if you put on a glass of broth that is stained, then return to your work until you have finished everything.
Then lift your head easily and cautiously, and cure it of other ailments until it is healed
Des apostemes de la gorge. Never comes from the throat boils that are called “Godath,” and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
if they are hard abscesses of little size and color of rust, do not touch them with iron
if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, even though it may burst blood; But leave it as long as it is whole, and then you will take it away, or it will break by itself.
And if it is pale in colour and the root is fragile, if you have brought the instrument to cover it, but look first to see if the swelling has subsided and is calmed.</start_of_turn>
Then make the patient sit before the sun, and his limbs be in their normal position, and cover his mouth and take hold of his hands, and press the tongue down towards the instrument, for this is the form.</start_of_turn
And be of silver or gold as thin as nails.</start_of_turn
Can you press the tongue down towards the instrument, and you see the swelling, if you take the ointment and put it in the hollow, and draw it out more than you wish.</start_of_turn
And do nothing with the towels, then take hold of the instrument, for this is its shape, that seems like a powerful force. And behold, the head of the sufferer is bent, one part over the other, and is very acute, and is made of iron or steel:
If you do not have this instrument present, if you can manage with pincers, know that this is the shape: Or that it be split on one side, and on the other side whole;
And when you have grasped one of the angles, if you grasp the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, hot and easy, and remove the blood that comes out, if you gargle the patient with hot water, or if there are pomegranate seeds or wormwood leaves, or similar things, until the wound is clean; Then the remedy must be such that it is effective while the patient is still sane;
Then never arise in the throat other abscesses than the two amanduses, if the nails are thrust in like the two amanduses always.</start_of_turn>
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was not in the throat, namely one abscess of small size.</start_of_turn
and had her close the throat well so that she could neither breathe through the choked passage nor eat or drink, and died because of that.</start_of_turn
And the abscess was so large that it had forced two grains out of the two holes of the nose
I had already seen so many, and in one I had made an incision, then the fire went up, and in the going up took a great portion of the bow.</start_of_turn
Then stretch out the other limb in the opposite direction of where it hurts, and cover the mouth and press the tongue;
After applying ointment to the abscesses, and pressing down a portion, only a little blood should escape Then grasp the tongue of the woman beside the neck and make her drink water and wine, and do not cease pressing on this abscess for a long time
The abscesses would recede at the same time as the swelling in the body would go down, as long as I avoided vomiting, and until the great swelling disappeared
Then I bound it and cauterized within the neck: Then let it rest and heal in peace;
And I am gone from these parts, and only God knows what happens to him after me.
De l’uve.
When the limb hangs downwards, and it flees and becomes long, if it is called a "perpendicular".
and if it is thick and round, it is called an "uve".
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the wound does not profit from it, you see that the wound is appeased and is subtle; therefore you must hold it together
and that which is round is assembled and is not too long; And it is bloody or of a reddish or black color, so beware the incision of it. For there is great peril upon the patient.</start_of_turn>
So be it, when you see it, according to what I have said, of its color and length, that you make the patient sit in the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we mentioned before. Then put on the ointment in the eye, and draw out the foreign body, and hold at I two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds
And be sure that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit;
because if you cover more, if it cries out with its voice and its throat;
And after the incision, use of that which we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure until it is healed.
And if the patient has fear of covering, then you must know that you must use something to restrain the patient at the cautery of the painful side.
And the manner of the cautery is acute and hot And let the patient put his head in its right place, and then press the tongue to the instrument which we have said or the surgeon of cautery, and grasp with live charcoal, if it is neither too thick nor too thin. And make use of the handle of this instrument, for it is like this shape:
Or has a beard or puts medicine, as with the nails of a nail, and put the instrument over the limb;
And the patient should keep his side against his chest, so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth over the medicine, if it does not go down to the throat, and makes a hiss
Then keep your hand on the medicine and press on the limb for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it wrinkled and the bite of the medicine is appeased.
And if you see it, take hold and cover it with no instrument, and moisten the cloth with the medicine, and press the instrument with all your might on the wound below, until the cloth sticks to the limb.
Do it often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it dry, and cut after three days or five
And if you have to renew the cautery of the medicine, if you renew it, and after the cautery wipe the limb thoroughly with cotton wool or lint, and bandage what is around the medicine
And let the water rise from a cold source, and cure the hoarseness as long as it is healthy.
This treatment is safer than incision, for the cautery
she is cured by fumigation according to this method, takes charcoal and rue and chamomile and marjoram and ivy and rosemary and similar herbs, and brings them all together in a pot, and puts oil on it, and boils.
and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot has the instrument that bites according to this method And let it be of silver or gold, and let the one of the hands bite into the patient’s mouth until the vapor rises to the eyebrow through the hole, until the eyebrow is numb;
After the redness has ceased, it often recurs as long as the wound is dry; keep that in mind when you begin the treatment of the burn, for many things happen then. ...and do not do this until the redness has subsided.
If these instruments are not present, take a needle and put a piece of egg-shell in the patient’s mouth, so that the patient does not suffer too much from the heat because the egg-shell does not make the vapor sting the mouth, and this is a good remedy for many things
Many times it has happened at the throat bone or fishbone, or nothing at all;
Therefore, if you saw it, treat what you see, and press the tongue to the sunlight with all your might, until you see the object;
And what does not open your mouth and is placed in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach. Otherwise if it is taken out by vomiting;
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of gut, or a lettuce root, or a dry breadcrumb; and tie it to the sponge, and then transfix it and when it comes back, if it is aired, and then draw out the foreign object.
and if it does not come out by this, take an instrument of pliers according to this form:
And let the beard be trimmed at the root if it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head lifted up. Beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, for if you do, it will cause him no good, nor will you drive the bone out of place.</start_of_turn>
Let the patient grasp the instrument, for if he is strong or the thing is slippery.</start_of_turn If the tongue swells or bites fiercely at the instrument evenly, as much as it can.</start_of_turn
And let the curved instrument rest at the head if it can more easily enter through the throat, and keep the head raised; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, for this can cause them to choke, do not push the bone inwards; and move quickly that the patient may hold the instrument, for if it slips or the thing is loose, since it has slipped down, or if it is forced too far, it will be equally broken.
Medicine is never without its danger, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines.</start_of_turn And when it does not help, look in the throat of the patient at the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you.</start_of_turn>
If you see the limb without its bone, if the fracture has penetrated all the way through, or if there are subtle cracks that are worth as much.
If these are not the case, take a saw and place it in the throat of the patient; then cut either upwards or downwards with the saw as much as is necessary. If the patient groans with acute pain throughout
Then take full notice that I see a cold sweat, and wet the mouth, and vomiting in the direction of swallowing, and the hand moves often. and if the tongue swells with the heat, it swells up.
And if it does not swell as we have said, if you suffocate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye;
do this many times, for it will have a sense of purpose.
And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot or there are charcoal pieces, and that the position be covered with a veil, and that which is pierced is the head of the instrument.
Then I order you to perform fumigation and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes out only through the nostrils.
and the nostrils will now swell, and if they do not bleed, repeat the fumigation many times.
and if the patient feels thirsty, and swallows dirty and foul things, and does not drink water;
then you must know that it is necessary for her to vomit because of this treatment.
And the shape of the instrument with which we treat the bleeding is, if we can see it, like tenailles hooked in the throat to enter the gorge; And it has the semblance of a vulture's beak, and it has the roughness of lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go.
The shape of these wounds is such as those of an abscess, as it is mentioned in this book many times, and they differ in perforation and size
There are two ways in which this occurs: one is like its own shape, and the other is due to moisture
And the second method if for the limbs or if they are stiff.
for the swelling of the head is different from that of the root, and the swelling of the limb is different from that which comes at the joints, and the tendons have their judgment in the work.
If there are abscesses, one must not pierce them until the swelling has subsided according to its degree;
If there are such cases where it is necessary to pierce them when they are solid, and they do not subside according to their degree, like an abscess which is between joints
for when swelling comes from the joints, and it is left until it is relaxed, by chance if the bone and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, because of this there is contraction in that limb.
Or the incision is at the root of the principal limb; and if you delay the perforation until it is middling, it will reach the principal limb.
Or it is at the root of the foundation, if the perforation is not done immediately when it is middling.
And I must only tell you that you must pierce the abscess in a straight line with digestion accompanying, except for the one at the root of the foundation, which must not be perforated, and be along, and there will be fistula and cannot be cured in great time.
And you must know that you must wash the wound of the abscess which is dead according to the completion, when the pain is calmed, and the departure of fever, and the cessation of pain and redness, and doubt and the swelling of the head of the abscess, and other signs
And you must know that you must make the perforation or more dependent on the abscess, and where it bursts out muscle.
Or if the perforation is long in the bone, and if the abscess is grasped by hand or piece, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all these cases it is equal or there is no fat. In these cases, according to the location of the limb.
And when the wound is in flesh, if it is deep enough that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in digestion, as we have said
For if you pierce before this, if it comes out along the bone, and there is plenty of pus; And by chance it strengthens the bones and deepens it from him.
And if there is no abscess that is perceived at the large end of the wound, according to what the limb has to bear.
And you must know that you must bring in small abscesses, small perforations; and many wounds according to the size of the abscess.
And if there are such abscesses, or if it is necessary to shave close the hair near, cover. When it is so swollen as a drape, and is softened, if necessary, one can do the same as with boils:
And if there are such as are split into three angles, and such as require being grasped just like the berries of thyme, or like abscesses of carbuncles.
And if there are such that require making a round cut of a certain size, and others of various sizes and similar to cutting off
When there is no head, if it is a superficial wound, it is necessary to pierce straight through
And when the abscess is large and there is a great swelling, and you pierce through, if you do not pull out all the swelling at that moment, but only a part Then I press the abscess right up to the other jaw, and then do nothing more. Do this repeatedly with great force, until the swelling is completely gone
Indeed, if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or a young child, or an old man decrepit. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Hence avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived the abscess, if the wound is small, look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is of full size, if you attempt to pull out hair or old cotton and if it is a large abscess, and there is much pus, you must know that you must bite together two attempts so that they meet each other
And if you have cauterized in the abscess a part of raw skin, and you have closed it round, then you must know that you must fill it with much cotton or lint of hemp in the direction of moisture, and keep it firm until the third part is over.
Then the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if blood should discharge from your work, if you order cold water and ease, and moisten the drape, and withdraw the draining limb many times.
And if the wound persists, if there is danger of infection and cure, and the powders that I have said are in the hands of the lord in this book, and if it is spring or summer, and the hands or the abscesses are covered with moisture, if you must put on bandages and wet cloths with vinegar and oil
and if it is in this state, and the hand is fleshy, if you must put on wet cloths with water and oil, or with vinegar and oil, until the third part is over, as we have said
Then take away the abscess, wipe away the pus, and treat the wound, if it is possible, until it is healed.
This action is useful for all kinds of abscesses.
Or as you have said, before treating the abscess, one must prepare the patient properly.</start_of_turn>
Or if the chief comes down with small abscesses, and they are like those which are in silk, as is the case with a goose, and there is in it something which resembles it.
There are some greasy or wet patients with moisture as with boils.</start_of_turn
And if there are some that are hard and painful at the bone, and no doubt that the artery does not oppose it.</start_of_turn
And as for the work of this size, if you expect with all the instruments which are called "instruments of introversion", from which the shape comes afterwards, what thing does it contain?
For if it contains moisture, if it flows down long.
When the moisture is evacuated, if you leave the skin that contains that moisture, it returns to its place.</start_of_turn
Then plunge the cotton swab into the Egyptian ointment, if it is present. If it is not present, in water and oil, and use the wound, and leave it until the other day. And this will counteract what remains dormant at night
And when it has begun again, like before, the second day, and the third, until you are certain that it does not remain dormant at night
Then cure the wound of ointment according to what is appropriate, until it is healed
And if the abscess persists without fat, if you cut it according to this form, for a long time And evacuate your sponges, and the pus from all parts, and put all your care to drain for the coat or where it lies
And if the artery opposes you, do as I have said afterwards.
In the same way, do an incision if it is purulent, and cut and cure as I have said before
And the size of the purulent incision and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little consequence And if there are any of these abscesses or heads [of wounds] or there is no moisture, and if these are the abscesses that I cauterize or heads of an old woman;
then find the abscess just like a stone, rough and pale, and cannot burst. and if it does not bleed, we must make an incision as with a stone.</start_of_turn>
In other abscesses that bleed or head, for these that come from the bowels and from the roots of the ears, it opens even on the most dependent day, for fear of bursting the belly.</start_of_turn
And the treatment is as it is commanded.
Many times this abscess arises at the collarbone, and the armpits, and in the groin, and never comes from anywhere else or bone, and is bloody, and is joined to each other.</start_of_turn
And every swelling is properly placed in its sheath, as we have said before; And the signs of these swellings are many.</start_of_turn>
And the signs of these swellings are many.</start_of_turn> There are some diseases that contain moisture, and if they have malignants that do not obey reason, they will not yield to treatment.
When you see a good colour in the touch, and that it is like the colour of bone, and soft from one side and not hollow as in the neck nor in the artery nor in the vein, nor deep.</start_of_turn
If you can grasp it by the root and the soft part, and if the two levers of the shoulder are as we have said in the apostemes of the head.</start_of_turn
And so be it that you keep your hands away from the nerve and the vein, and do not touch or handle anything that may cause spasm or bleeding, only grasp firmly and do not speak too soon, lest you cause more harm than good.
And if you grasp the vein or the artery, and this does not allow you to work, if you put in the wound a bit of vitriol broth or any powder that remains bloodless, and strain the wound; And leave it until the swelling has subsided and the wound is softened, and then begin to move around.
When the thing is washed clean, if you return to your work, until you have finished it;
Then your duty will be shown if there remain no small scabs, if you grasp and touch them
And if there is a large swelling at the root of the scrophula vein, I do not advise you to grasp only the swelling at its root; but rather to bind it with a strong double thread and leave it hanging freely, as needed.
Then apply the dressing of many layers of cotton, oiled in Egyptian fashion, and then treat the wound
If you have completely cauterized the boil, know that you must now join the two layers of the wound and suture them; and that there will be no remaining excess due to the size of the boil. If you understand to grasp the root of the thing and to pull out the pus, and to suture as we have said.</start_of_turn>
If you understand to grasp the root of the thing and to pull out the pus, and to suture as we have said.</start_of_turn> The scrofula that persists in excess, pierce it or I fear it will die.
And pierce it like the one before mentioned, depending on the situation, and mix it with oil and similar things, so that it may remove what remains of the corruption When the wound is well closed, if the oily dressing adheres firmly, as long as it is healthy.
The ancient men spoke and told of the measurement of the throat; but I have never seen it in our land, and it is the writing of their words.
As for those who have a squint, it is necessary that the epiglottis, which is called the epiglottis, be turned away. and this does no good, for all the veins and the blood of the patient are at those which are above the mouth, in the throat or in the two mandibles
When the disease is in the chest of the abdomen, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.</start_of_turn>
It is therefore necessary, when we want to split the epiglottis, to split it from three circles or four, a small cut between the two circles or by the quantity of the split of the cartilage;
And if the larynx is closed to the epiglottis, there is no meat there, and the blood vessels are long and thin.
And if the master is fearful, then you must stretch the skin of the throat to its furthest extent, and then cut the hair as far as the chin; And hide the blood vessels, if you see nothing else, and then close the wound as we have said before.
It is shown by the cutting of the windpipe that the cough will erupt from the broken bone, and by the loss of voice;
And leave the wound open for a piece.
When the hour has passed and the strangulation is not seen, gather the two layers of the wound of the chin, and bind them all around the cartilage
Then administer medicines that cause the growth of hair, until they are healed.
Albucasim does not make this just until the throat is completely closed, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the default is that it has failed.</start_of_turn> Therefore keep the epiglottis closed for this reason that the patient does not vomit, and he breathes through the wound; and thus death is averted.</start_of_turn>
And for this reason the ancients command that the wound remain open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it is passed in three days or four. And when it is healed, they command that the wound be sutured and healed, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And I tell you this, that I have seen. I have seen that a lady took a knife and put it in her throat, and grasped parts of the windpipe that were hanging loose.</start_of_turn
And I fled called for the cure, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had escaped from it, and saw that it did not penetrate any vein or artery except for the throat, and that the blood came out through the wound itself.</start_of_turn
I hurried, and saw the wound, and cured it until it healed completely.
There was no further complaint from her, except that her voice was hoarse, and she returned to her usual state
Therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis I did not feel fear
These abscesses are called "neck hernia," and are large abscesses the color of jaundice, and are very common in women
And there are two methods for treating them: Natural treatment and surgical treatment
Or natural treatment has no effect.
And the cause of the accident is two ways, for one is like grease to us, and the other way is like an abscess which comes from an artery. and there is doubt, and one cannot do more work than in this small thing, and the evidence and the search is in everything that is inside: if you find it just like I do not know of grease, and cannot do anything to it, if it swells, as we swell the thumb, and take away from all around it, if there is no point; and cover everything thoroughly, and treat it as if it could be saved, until it is perfectly healed
Many things of this kind are with us, of which I will speak of all the similarities.
And thus it is proven that I shall tell you all the difference that exists between a nut and an issue.
I say that dislocation is a heat and fever that persists as long as the inflammation has not passed, and is accompanied by swelling; Therefore rest the fever and heat.
Without a nut there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, but it contains the sap, which is its own bag and is like the color of blood, and begins like an abscess and becomes large;
And are like wax, grease, or moisture, and moist of the color I have said in the division
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the knot, that you first examine and inquire about the instrument which is called the “entromissoire,” according to its form or chapter which follows.
And the manner of inquiry of abscesses of the head is that you take more moisture from the head than you find in the abscess, and twist your thumbs and fingers back and forth until you believe that the instruments have felt the pain, then that it is in proportion to the greatness of the abscess
Then remove the entraumeater, and take care that the leap bound over it does not spring forth.
When moisture covers the skin, making it slick, if it is like this with other incisions;
and if after the removal of the entraumeater no moisture comes, greasy discharge, if it is like this with other incisions, grasp the surrounding area with tweezers and pinch slightly towards the bone, and keep the dressing in place with your hand or with a bandage.</start_of_turn>
and if you do not handle it carefully, if you tear it piecemeal so that nothing remains.</start_of_turn>
For if nothing remains, it will return to us many times.</start_of_turn
If it lingers a little while, and without pain, if you employ a wound of some corrosive powders, hold the wound steady, and apply calming things above the wound, and it will heal of itself; and do other treatments until it is healed.
If it swells greatly, if cost two pounds of the wound, and treat it of that which engulfs flesh.
If the vein swells up against you or something similar forces you, and if you hurry and use the broth of vitriol ground fine, and leave it for two or three days, until the wound bursts, and rest the swelling of blood then return to cover what is remaining that has lingered from now on.
See here the forms of the entrapped bones, and there are three kinds: Great, medium, and small;
There are three quarters which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three ways of doing it. Great, medium, and small, for to encompass the fistulas of the abscesses.
And are like nails which we sew up the wounds, and are of saffron, or iron, or silver, and must be thick enough to encompass the cortices of the fistulas
And there are three ways of doing it Great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the perforation.
The shapes of the needles are like those of wheat grains, as you see here:
...and if there are those who have two curves of three ways also.
...and if there are those who have three curves, and are also of three ways
...and if there are those who have two curves, and one curve only, and are of three ways
...and all these things are necessary in their place.
The head of these shoulders feels is tense, and there are some that cut only from one side, from which we extract the nails, because of this we do not close the vein or the nerve.
...and from these inward movements are the bones repositioned in sleeves, so that the patient does not lose them when opening the abscesses;
And there are three methods: And there are three methods: great, small, and medium, as you see.
and do not use them except in cases of fractures, such as legs, arms, ribs, and spleen; or similar conditions.
never use another small instrument, resembling fists, in this form, because it stops the blood flow And one must never put it back in the same place where it has been severed from veins, arteries, and never again in like manner: for in this great form.
Never swell the breasts of any man when they begin to decay, so that they appear like the breasts of a woman
and remain silent and discreet, and who would see them cured if you do not tell them according to this form from line b to line g Then scrape off the fat, and apply the medical salve with charcoal, then sew together the two layers of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the breast swells downwards, and is calmed by its great size as with women, if it hangs from two ribs below, by two similar incisions; then one must hold one to the other at the end of both, so that the greater line contains the less, according to this figure, from this line B up to line G Then scrape off the skin between the two layers, and bone the fat, and mix in what we have said of stitches and powders, and anything else necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
And if he is not quite healed, or the incision is not quite finished, because the patient does not see himself recovering, or for the discharge of blood, if you must, fill the wound with moist cotton wool in corrosive order. And leave it until the fat has healed and the edges have closed, then treat it until it is healed
These abscesses that come from the buttocks are like hard carbuncles and there is only that in them contains moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.: When any bone in the appendage is emptied, if you use a broad bandage and leave it until the other side, then bind up all the bandage, and cure the wound that has arisen from this until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the abscess appears to be like small carbuncles, if you do as we have said in the incisions of carbuncles, and if the wound rents open, if you join the cautery as we have said before.</start_of_turn
When the artery is severed and the skin is raw above, if there are many abscesses again, and just as much blood escapes from the vein as from the incision;
and if you know that it is the artery, if the abscesses are long and burst through; When you know that it is necessary, if you know it has been torn out;
And when it comes to the vein, if it is renewed to flow freely;
and it is foolish to think that this will be enough to stop the bleeding from the wound and the abscesses, and the boils and the bites and other wounds, for there is great loss of blood in these matters. Therefore one must avoid the treatment of fire, and he who is in charge must also avoid it, and in that in which an artery is burst by the swelling of a vein from beneath the skin; for this is a perilous matter
then one must open the size as one would uncover a vein, and remove the blood from the clot, until it is completely uncovered
then one must extract the clot with a hook, and make it pierce through to the other side, and hold the vein with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two veins in the temples
Then point out the area between the two links of the humerus until the bone that is there is freed from its position; and hold the abscess firmly.
Then bring close the wound that encloses the bone, until it quiets; and keep the abscess well bound Then treat the swelling that follows this, until it is healed; and hold it firmly
and if the abscess is as big as the vein, then you must hold your hand firmly in place over the abscess and push the needle through the limb and pull out the bone, and there should be two stitches, so that you can grasp it from the other side and tie the abscess as I have said, or tie it with two pieces of thread as two strings of thread
If you doubt that the wound has not fully healed, if it recoils from another awl at the site of the first incision, and the awls are held in place for three days,
then hold the swelling until it subsides, and then hold the swelling down for some time and leave what is bound over;
then apply a moist dressing of wine and oil, and bind it with stitches and ointment until it heals.
Thus as well as with the incision of a vein or a vein, abscesses also come with nerves when they are irritated or from too great a workload, and similar things.
And this often happens in the armpits and the groin or in all joints, and it is the cause of many wounds, and its color is like the color of corn, and it causes great pain;
and when it is strained, if it causes the patient pain, and is not as red as corn, but is more like yellow.
And he must remain silent from all sides, neither going forward nor backward, neither downwards nor upwards, and he who is in joints must not be covered with iron. By chance, there may be contraction. And he who is head, shoulder, or face, makes the skin pale like parchment
And he who is head, shoulder, or face, makes the skin pale like parchment If the abscess is small, if the patient has some tension, and he grasps it at the root;
If it is large, if the abscess has pus at the bone, and he boils it, then he breaks the bone and joins the wound together, and he heals as long as it is safe
Never happens in the belly and not anywhere else, and is a disease which is called "fungus" because of the resemblance of dust, and is the root of all troubles, and the chief thing.
And there are small and great pains;
And I saw there two who had two or three swellings which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a great root, and were all split open, and were full of moisture.
I bound them and found in one XVIII ounces weight, and in the other VI, III, and the works were done in the incision if you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a faint root if the boil bursts wide open, and if you are present, do the cautery with fire.
if the boil bursts wide open, and if you are present, do the cautery with fire. For at the root comes often too great a discharge of blood, and if it does not go away, if you hurry up then do the cautery;
And if you see the patient groaning and fearing the incision, take a strong thread well made, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then restrain him, and do not cease to tighten the thread until it grasps the artery; and ask him what work it is doing.</start_of_turn>
And if the roots are large, if he has fear at the same time for the belly, but you must cover half well, then cauterize so that it does not return.</start_of_turn
Then cure the wound, and keep that you only cover the area that is of a dark color and of little sense and of milk residue.</start_of_turn>
For this is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the abscess later.
When the head of the shoulder is for. If pus appears, it comes from cautery of a wound or incision of fat, and is on the belly and is in some veins, as it happens in other ways, or blood that escapes from veins or arteries according to what is before, or windiness.</start_of_turn
If the pain is in the armpit or the buttocks, and the colour of the wound resembles that of corn, and there is little pain, and various issues ensue. and if it is through the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it with your hands if it returns and comes back, and by chance if it is closed, and grows large with water and for much work.
If the cause is moisture, it is a light matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain me;
If the cause is blood, if it opens with these signs, the wound is large and hard, and is clotted to a considerable extent If the cause is wind, if it is rough at the touch, and the work if you look is that of a vein or an artery, or wind
If the cause is wind, if it is rough at the touch, and the work if you look is that of a vein or an artery, or wind If you think that you must leave the dressing. For there is doubt and fear, as I have already said or as in this chapter about abscesses, due to the artery and the vein.</start_of_turn>
If the appearance is in the intestine or the buttocks, if you command the patient to hold his breath, and he is exhausted, then stretch out all the way, and then mark around the bulge; Then he commands to grasp the limb between your hands, then go around the limb that you have signed at all the circumference, then pull out half of the depth at the bottom of all the bone. Then he ties it around with a strong thread or a strong silk cord firmly, and keep it firm.</start_of_turn>
Then withdraw half of the depth extended above the limb, and put your thumb and index finger on it, and hold the intestines.</start_of_turn If you find it seized to the limb, if you pull it out, hold the intestines away from the belly.</start_of_turn
If you find swelling, if you grasp the bone, and break off the excess.</start_of_turn
And if the artery or vein is torn, if it goes well inwards, return to your work and take two needles, and bring two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have made in the cross that you make pierce.
Then strain the abscess in three layers above the needles, and if you see, hold the needles firm, and leave the wound open until it bursts, and cut off the dead flesh by itself.</start_of_turn> Or you can grasp it when it is subtle and carries, then cure what is causing the swelling, and tie the abscess as we have said.</start_of_turn
Or you can grasp it when it is subtle and carries, then cure what is causing the swelling, and tie the abscess as we have said.</start_of_turn Then drain the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound from what is causing the swelling, and close the wound.</start_of_turn>
And draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the cause of it, and bandage the limb. We have said in the previous sections about the signs of an abscess, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should shun the cautery.
We have said in the previous sections about the signs of an abscess, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should shun the cautery. And we say that the abscess swells in the marrow, and has great caution in the treatment, and they say that when an abscess is in its place or one can remove it if it is like an abscess that is enclosed in marrow, and in the flesh, and in other things; and one should remove it immediately when it is in its beginning.
no one has ever healed me of this before
And in the work, when it is in place or when one can hold it off, as we have said, never purge the patient of black bile.
then make him well if he shows excessive swelling, then expel the evil from the body entirely in a good way for the work;
then remove your nails or abscesses, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts so that nothing is left undone
leave the blood to flow freely, and press firmly with your hand or anything else, so that if there is a bruise from the incision of the vein or artery, the cautery may be done without it being stained then treat with other treatment until it is healed.
De ydropisie. We have already said concerning dropsy that its signs are assembled from water, and its symptoms resemble those of a wound; and the treatment which is made by medicines, and that which is made by fire.
and one must not touch iron in these two symptoms: for these are deadly things
then when you have given these medicines for this symptom which is called "ECLites" of medicines, and it does not profit, if you notice that the patient is weak, or if there is another disease besides dropsy, such as all sorts of abdominal and similar things; do not touch iron, for there is doubt;
If you see the patient very strong, and he has only hydrophobia, neither too young nor too old, then you must work on him. Believe the patient firmly in your hands, and press the abdomen towards the lower part of the spleen, then take the spinous process in this shape: And let two parts be excised. With a point, and do not go too deep so that it can come out as soon as it is pushed into place; do not obstruct it.</start_of_turn>
Then look if hydrophobia is confined towards the intestines.</start_of_turn If you think that you have reached the third rib, put two fingers on the epiglottis.</start_of_turn And if dropsy is caused by the disease of the liver, if so be your incision on the left side of the buttock III.
And if it is caused by the urine, if so be it on the right side, and do not make it so that the patient lies on the incision that the excess fluid does not flow to that weak limb.
Then pierce through the skin with the instrument, and withdraw it, and keep your hand over the area between the skin and the cartilage just as when escorting the quantity of an nail or as much as an inch in thickness
Then pierce through the cartilage until the thumb comes out, and that is the cause of the pain, then pull out the instrument, and there you have it: this is the form of the instrument And it is similar to a silver needle, and is of barley or barley chaff lighter, and has at the upper part a little hole. or costs from one side three holes.</start_of_turn> and two from the other side, and one from the other.</start_of_turn
and the head is cut off like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision which is written to cut off the head.</start_of_turn
at the top is the marrow, so that when the instruments are brought to the edge, if they go too deep now on the instruments.</start_of_turn
leave half or a third part of it, for if you take more than that at this hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit of the weapon, or he will bleed profusely, or he will approach death.</start_of_turn
But according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the provisions of the virtue tell the patient, and his pains.
Then carry out the instrument and hold the pain, and it is retained now by the hook which is stamping the part above the surface, as I have said, that you pierce according to this manner.
Then repeat the instrument the other way, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take out a small amount of pain;
Do not do this again, and take care not to do this until there remains only a little pain.
And if you doubt the patient, and you put too much pain, if the surgeon of the burial or sand burn, and by putting out sweat or bath and sun, and drink plenty of liquid. And the treatment of dry medicines until they are healed, and cauterize upon the stomach and upon the liver and upon the spleen after the extraction of the urine, as I have said before.
Never are children born without a mark on their belly, or the mark is small, or it is not properly in its place.
If the coving [cautery] is too great, that it causes no perception at all in all the surrounding parts following this form:
Then put or pierce I clo of ointment, and bind and hold it for III days or IV, and when he wants to urinate, if he keeps it closed, make him urinate, and then put it back
and by chance it cannot be, for the urine that comes out will not leave it closed.
If the opening is small, if it is treated with oil of lead, as we have said, if it dilates.
Those who do not have the opening in their limb are blind, for none are born with the opening at the head of the penis, for they cannot urinate before they lift up their penis and cannot urinate because of that, for the matter cannot come down to the marrow, and that is a bad illness
And thus the work proceeds if the patient lies somewhat bowed down on his back, so that the head of the arm and the elbow are as wide as a thumb, if indeed he has pierced through flesh in the middle, as he should.
And thus you must keep from bloodshed which often comes, and if it comes, if the stain of that which stains blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Des pustules de la verge. Many times this white spot appears in the arm, and is an omen of great suffering.</start_of_turn
and there are malignant and non-malignant.</start_of_turn
if it is possible that you take hold of it and cut it superficially, and break all the bones and teeth, then put on Egyptian linen cloth.</start_of_turn Then the treatment of ointment is applied until it is healed.
And if the bath is bad, of dark colour and putrid, if you must bring cautery to it.
When you have grasped it, and if the swelling is in the hip, and there is some in the belly and some outside, then you must stretch the swelling that is inside first and when it is softened, if the ointment has been ejected
For when you treat it whole, if you do not keep the shoulder firmly in place, it will blacken and corrupt the limb and the bone.
if you must cover everything that is black and corrupt, then apply honey and flour made from pomegranate peel and sometimes, apply other ointments until it is healed
And if blood flows away, if you mix the lunar cautery in this fashion:
The cautery is of two sorts: It is to say, at the discharge of blood, and the corruption;
When the head of the arm is corrupted and retracted, if it is suspected that you have swallowed or passed a clot from the vein, and the patient urinates among them;
When the skin is pierced at the root of the arm which has not been previously circumcised, or if there is a wound or incision, if it is suspected that the blood vessels are lacerated, then you must immediately grasp the arm and pull it away from the wound until the bleeding stops
If this matter is neglected, if it is suspected that the fracture of the bone is not displaced, that you must grasp the arm without moving its head or shoulder.
Then sprinkle somewhat between two, and I put one subtle bandage of wet linen on the cold water, which does not move from its place.
Circumcision is not simply a continuation of other wounds; However, when we make this work of our will, and properly apply it, if it is necessary that we make it better, and the lighter for the health.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in their laws, because they did not use it in their customs, and we have only what we have learned through experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and doctors who make circumcision endure for a long time, with force, and with all their skill;
If they flee from fear because of two tiles, and by chance they break this one and leave the other one behind Or it is recovered covered, and the pain is doubled, and there is confusion that is not sure whether the point of the limb is fixed;
And at the loosening of the ligament by chance escapes the iron, and corrects the work, and many times they are born anew that they do not need to be loosened again, and I desire it.
Or the wound covers again, and the pain is doubled, and at the movement which is done with too much force at the point of the limb; and at the movement of the tendon by chance escapes the iron, and repairs the work, and many times the nails are born again without having to make another incision, and I want that.</start_of_turn>
For when you press your hand, if it is equally taut throughout, but that the thread is well stretched around the skin;
and that the manner of the first work makes you think of the child, if he understands, that you do not force him to bind the thread around the limb too tightly, but that you make him do it loosely in various ways as you wish
then you make him grasp between your hands straight, and bring the forces between your hands or withdraw your pieces that the child does not see them, neither any of the instruments;
Then take your hand to the shoulder and breathe or groan, and pull it up as high as the head of the shoulder is bent; Then thoroughly cleanse the wound of the filth that is gathered there, then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie it firmly so that it does not slip away again.
Then thoroughly cleanse the wound of the filth that is gathered there, then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie it firmly so that it does not slip away again. And hold it as two fists by the second loop to the pouch and the thumb, and pass between the two loops, then hold the thumb downwards tightly and pull the head of the shoulder forward Then let the blood flow back slowly and steadily, because that is the medicine. And put powder on and over the powder I drape a cloth glued with an egg yolk smeared with rose oil and fresh, and leave it until the other side is healed, and cure it with other ointments until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
The forces of form are multiplied when this is the case:
when both shoulders are tense and firm, and the arms are as strong as the hands equally.
the force of the world is great when the tendons are torn during an incision.
therefore you must extend your nails, even though it makes the wound burst open
and keep it even, and if you do not wish to hold it with your nails, grasp it firmly, and then pull it out
and if it persists for three days, and what is below the edge is inflamed, if you leave it as long as the swelling subsides, and gently scorch it
If the head of the shoulder is like this, and you hold it from the root of the limb, it will not move at all.
For if the head of the arm is like this, and you hold it from the root of the limb, it will not move at all.
Then cure it as we have said, until it is healed
Dou retenement de l’urine
It holds back urine if there is an obstruction of a stone, or blood clot, or tumour, or worms, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division.
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the obstruction is in the stone which is in the belly or the neck of the bladder, if you must, you must bend the patient over his knees And let the patient place his foot on his back, extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and hold the patient still as much as he can. Then constrain the collar of the bladder towards the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is released easily
If it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments which are called a «syringe», for this is the form:
Or of fine silver wire, as thick as a sparrow’s quill; And let the cauterization be of a long and a half palm, and of a finer sort at the head
And thus the method of extracting urine is as follows: if you take two needles and bind one to the head of a wool or cotton swab, and pass the needle through the bladder.
and keep the surplus of wool and pass the juice until it reaches the head of the syringe, then join the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and gently raise the bladder and the oily parts moist with oil and water
and put the syringe into the bladder until it reaches the root of the bladder, and double the bladder under the pubic bone
and pull the syringe out before it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel the urine come out until it is empty, and this must not be done except in this order because it may cause damage;
Then the thread is at its greatest length, and the urine follows the thread, then the bladder is emptied, and the urine is corrected.
The catheter is resumed until the bladder is empty, and the patient is aligned.</start_of_turn>
When there are flank stones or blood in the bladder, or if there is swelling, and you see urine and medicines being distilled, if you have at your disposal the instrument called the «clepsedre», which is shaped like this:
It is closed, and if there are three holes: Two from one side, and one from the other, as you see.</start_of_turn>
and the head of the shoulder is held so that the medicine can be applied as well as possible to the bone, if we can remove the moisture, and push as much as necessary.</start_of_turn
And when you see the medicines dripping from the bladder, put the head of the physician over the moisture, and push the one who is behind.</start_of_turn
If you grasp moisture at the shoulder, and then quickly push back the hand that grasps it; If then moisture enters the hand, and comes to the belly now, if the patient feels it;
it is the shape of a subtle blister from which we must drain the belly:
It is of silver or gold, and the head is higher
and the bones creak within or the limb is dislocated
then take a bladder of mutton and put the moisture which you saw draining from the belly inside it, and bind it between the two armpits with a double thread, and burn that moisture on the fire.
Then stretch the arm forward, and strain your hand over the bladder with all the moisture that comes, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have a bladder, if take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it round about the edge Then stretch the thread firmly through these holes, then assemble the circle as if you were assembling a ball, and put inside what you see of oil, moisture and water, and bind it with an instrument.
And do as if you had made a bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Of the stone.
We have said above the methods of cutting and the extraction of arrows, together with medicines.
And I have said the difference between a stone embedded as rain and all the signs, and in what case a stone must be opened of size. And in the bladder, and in the kidney;
And I shall tell you openly and briefly
I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder is often like rain, and this is a sign that the stone has burst from the bladder as if from its subtlety
and opens the kidney, and grinds the patient's flank, and it can happen many times, and then it hardens; And from these bursts the foundation is loosened;
and is light the healing of the bursts until they are three years old, and is great grief in the elderly, and is like a young man between youth and old age;
And it is the lighter cure of those who have the large stone, than of those who have the small one.
And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary, first purify the patient by vomiting, to drive out all the bile that is in the intestines. For it never hinders to inquire about the stone.
Then take the patient by the limbs, and loosen and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not rise up again high;
Then make him sit between your hands, and his hands rest on his thighs, so that the bladder is completely emptied downwards
Then press and touch inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, then quickly pull up on the stone immediately.</start_of_turn>
And if it does not come out with the touch, then take your left index finger, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and robust; And the stone at its foundation, and ask the bone, and when you feel it at your elbow, if the marrow is at the neck of the bladder.
Then press on your elbow, and the stone will be forced out or you will see your tailbone
And instruct the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the ribs above, and with his left hand grasp the skin that is below the ribs in the part where we make the incision;
Then pull out the clot covering, for that is the shape And enter between that which is between the ribs and the foundation, do not go inside but along the edge of the left armpit;
And either hold two fingers upon the stone, and the two must either stay or rest, and the size of the hole must be as great as the breadth of the stone, but not too large; according to the quantity of the stone, do not make it too wide.
By chance the press if two must stay or rest, that it leap forth in the direction of work.
and the nails that are on the edge of the stone or that are angled, and margins if they are gripped to split.
and if there is something soft that looks like a gland, round, from which there is a slight oozing
Then make the hole larger where there are angles and margins
If it does not jump, know that you must draw above the nails which are as sharp as a file at the root, for the tooth must be drawn out if it escapes. or you must hold the instrument curved at the root firmly.</start_of_turn>
and if you do not hold it firmly, if it is too large, the vessel will burst, and if the vein is split open.</start_of_turn
and if there are more than one tooth, first draw out the largest at the root of the vessel, then draw out the others in order.</start_of_turn>
If it is large, if it must be soothed, and make greater pain. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or the urine comes together due to the heat that the leaves cannot withstand.</start_of_turn
But all the while you must exert yourself greatly to tear, or to remove, the teeth, until you have torn them out in pieces.
And when you have finished your work, if you apply the salve of incense, aloe, and dragon’s blood, and hold it tight, and put above it a wet cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the burn. Then restore the patient to his collar, and do not loosen the ligature until the third joint below
And when you have loosened it, if there arises much blood from the wound of oil and water, then treat with oily dynafinicon and oily basilicon, until it is healed.
And if boils come to the wound and carbuncles, and swelling of blood in the bladder, or because of retention of urine, which is known in part as being like urine without its discharge: Boutes donc ton Doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sang, car s’il y reste, si corront la vessie, et la porrit.
Then lift the wound of acute and easy and gentle aid, and support it in every way you know, until it is healed;
and that you cover that all the hours that you treat it, that you bind the two edges together, and assemble the medicines on the place.
And if the wound is small, and it is an opening of the gut, and is plugged with silk, and the urine cannot pass; if you are treating this as I have said above, that you must listen to me many times, for this cure is heard of in this size I have already heard of this in other cases
Take a piece of iron according to this form and make two angles fixed in one vessel:
Then take I thread and loop it around the root of the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder.
Then tighten the thread lightly in the root until it comes to the stone; and turn the thread around the stone back and forth, until you can pierce the stone from the other side
When the urine comes, then press your hand on that which is remaining of the stone that is in the root. If it is broken, and spurts with the urine, and is seen by the patient;
and if you are unable to do this for any reason, then take I thread from the root of the stone and I other from above, and push the root towards the stone between the two lines, and then pull it out forcefully, and release the thread, and congeal the blood in the wound And keep it steady until it is healed.
If you do not wish to do this by any means, take hold of the limb above the joint and support the limb below, then push the limb forward between the two tendons, and pull it out forcefully, remove the tendon, and congeal the blood that is in the wound; and cure as long as it is necessary.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
one is that in such cases the woman is a virgin.
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is truly learned, even though she is chaste.
and the third is that one cannot find a woman who is truly learned in this work of hands;
and the fourth is that if the woman’s hand is more plump than the man’s, because it can therefore hold a deeper size, and great pain is at this point. And if you need some skill in this, if you take a mistress who is truly learned, and prick her with the needle, and if you do not find her to be chaste, there is no woman in the world who is as subtle as she.
And she presents a cunning dance in the life of women, or a woman who cuts off a part of her body, and she commands her to do what you command her with the inquiry of the stone; and look well if the woman is a virgin.
and look well if the woman is a virgin. then she must push her shoulder forward or downwards and inquire about the stone.
and if she finds it, if she confines her shoulder socket, she recommends that she push her shoulder forward or with the patient, and she orders her to press her left hand on the bladder area
if she finds it, she must move it from its entrance on the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh
Then put your hand on the thigh at the root of the knee and find the middle of the bone, where it is usually visible, and feel the bone in that part. Do not move the forearm under the bone or beside it, and let the size be small at first.</start_of_turn>
Do not move the forearm under the bone or beside it, and let the size be small at first.</start_of_turn> Then tighten the limb steadily, if you feel the bone growing in the wound as much as the bone can bear, and soak up the blood that has flowed many times before.</start_of_turn
This is to say, small and large, acute and blunt, long and round, and which have rained.</start_of_turn>
if her discharge resembles stones, it is an issue.
And if it does not go away, if put at the limb vitriol broth, and hold it for an hour until it is stained.</start_of_turn
Then return to your work, as long as the stone is firm, and have the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone, for they are useful to you in your work.
If it does not go well, and it is the artery that is cut, put powder on the wound and hold tight with clamps and bandages, and do not attempt to move it again, but leave the stone alone and do not touch it, except in the event of an accident that causes the patient to die Then treat the wound.
When the bleeding has ceased and the limb is at rest, if you return to this work while the wound is still fresh, as long as the bone is firm.</start_of_turn>
Warm water is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white fat, which is like lukewarm urine from cows, that contains eggs.
It is called "syfac," and never is it properly in the urine of a cow, if we take care that it is not something else And this is the skin between the white surface that we mentioned before.
And it does not swell further. And the generation of this membrane is from weakness that comes from the cheese, and it is spread throughout that matter.
And never if it comes from percussion on the bones, and this moisture is of many colors: or it is pale yellow, or it is without red, or black, or pale blue, and this is more
And these are signs of congestion in this assembly, because if it is like the white surface that we mentioned before, if the abscess is reddish, I do not see the bones, because there is moisture everywhere
And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, if the abscess is reddish with a part of the yolk, and because of this it is believed that it is another bone;
And if moisture is between the skin of the armpits and the white membrane, if he feels well;
Then when you know the colour of the moisture, if it spreads throughout the entire inwardness where it appears, from that it is known that its form is as it is before. According to this, therefore, which comes after the introductor, judge of what is within.
And when we bind the limb with iron, if it is known that the patient is well according to the poor and the filling of his body;
then we support him on his back, on something somewhat high, and put on him a little bandage
then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right side, and stretch the limb to the second rib below the armpits;
then take the sponge of lead, and grasp the skin of the armpits among the long hair as far as the ridge of the scapula, and make a complete incision straight across the armpits down to the white membrane, and burn it superficially as much as the poor allows
Then pierce the skin deeply with a large hole, drain all the liquid, and then place your thumbs on, extend the skin upwards.
Do not touch the root of the bones, but only the skin should be grasped gently Cope either all at once or in pieces by itself the cost of it secretly, for if you do not cope it well, the liquid will return
If the limb leaps up to your work, keep it in its place until you have completed the work of the incision
Then assemble the two limbs of the bones at a joint, and then suture if like the other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the limb corrupted by another illness, then you must tie up the vessels that are suspended, doubting the decay of blood;
Then grasp the shoulder firmly with all the suspenders, and draw out the limb, and cure it as we have said.
And if it is assembled into two parts together, its roots are two branches. if you have grasped the other part in the same way as the first, then press out the blood, and put lint in the wound soaked in rose oil
if you have grasped the other part in the same way as the first, then press out the blood, and put lint in the wound soaked in rose oil and put another layer of gauze soaked in wine and oil on top, and put on the two shoulders, and put on under doubled cloths, and bind it up in the way that is according to this form:
Then take two cloths and use coarse wool according to this shape and join them together at the armpits, and one hand grasps at the bottom just up to the back, and the other at the part of the armpit
And the other two heads above the two armpits, and so be altogether assembled the restriction in the loop of the braid.
And never is this twig of cautery as large as iron, and take I cautery of the pointed kind, and burn the hair of the flanks, and so eschew if we have said, so that the white fat that contains the liquid is discovered.
If you take the cautery thus, and pierce that fat as we have said, and burn with this pointed cautery:
And so burn in all ways that you will, until you have scraped all of it away.
And keep that the flame does not touch the egg;
and the wounds that this work is more helpful. and bloodletting for the removal of swellings, and medicines that mitigate the severity of the diseases;
and if anything hinders you, or incisions of boils or discharges of blood or anything else, if you can, cure that which hinders you, as it is said above
and if the patient is pale and does not wish to stay with this work because of its horror, if you must perform an incision, as I have said, and when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that the swelling has gone down, if you wish, you may seat the patient on a low chair then make the incision at the lower part of the limb with all the surrounding tissue, and put the perforation through to the bone's length
Or let the wound be large, so that all the pain will cease for certain.
Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and leave until the remaining pain ceases; then cure until the wound is healed completely.</start_of_turn>
If the white cloth does not hold back the pain at the edge of the wound, then you must drink a penny or the instrument with which the wound is treated for dropsy.</start_of_turn
And make the wound large, and soak it in water so that the pain returns, and bandage it together after six months or when the pain has passed, and when it is bandaged as before, the patient will recover his days.</start_of_turn
Soaking as in the section of this twig has many precautions, for I believe it is better to leave it alone.</start_of_turn
And I shall tell you of the work and the semblance of the abscess.
I say therefore that the main cause of an abscess comes from suppuration or boils, and even cysts; And it is through experience.
This is to say by excessive rubbing and swelling, which is caused by boils or percussion;
and it has the color of an abscess according to the color of boils; and does not cause pain, but is a true abscess
and sometimes it is a bloody abscess, purulent and painful, with a foul color, and never comes from a vein or swelling of a vein.
When there is no pulse from an artery, if it is known by the position of the cautery, when you press on it at your side; and you must not touch it there.
The one that is made of swelling of a vein is known by its position at the expression of touching the sides, and can well do the size above this semblance, and above the others and that you hold it like nails, then the head will be high, and the thread for white silk, and deliver the suspension from all parts of the head.
If the head of the limb is already swollen with these nails, if you can, then only treat the limb and hold it
And if it is near the surface of the skin, or in what is inside the blood vessels, you must deliver all the surrounding tissue, and the cavity must be rounded off.
If the limb hangs loose from the socket or from behind, then you must grasp all that is taut, and pull out the root, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
When your work is finished, if you have used up the soft wool dressing in oil and rose wine, then cure it with other ointments until it is healed.</start_of_turn
This is an abscess enclosed by a covering resembling two boards, with the softening of the bones, and the patient groans when he walks.
The treatment for this disease is as dangerous as the disease itself, as we have often seen in the past.
You must make the patient sit on a low seat, then support the bones below his shoulders to the armpits, all the veins that are around the edge, and hold them firmly, and stretch them out
Then grasp the spur of the tooth that is piercing wide through the blood vessels, until it is uncovered, and then pull it out from the root, as we said in the extraction of arteries in the temples.
Then insert a needle or if there is double thread, and bind it to the first limb or the nail has gone, and bind it loosely at the other end. Then hold them (the teeth) in the middle upright, according to the length of the root, and remove the corrupted moisture
Then treat the wound as others or bathe, so that no blood vessel is cut except those that nourish one of the bones
because by this there is no harm, and if all the blood vessels come loose, as it should be, if you can carry the bones over all the blood vessels. If the oesophagus does not lose its nourishment from the incision of the veins, and if it is dried and does not swell, it will not need aid.
The outcome of this root is if it is by the section that comes or if it is extended on the belly in the part of the flanks, because the intestine descends from that passage to one of the buttocks.
And this passage is either by section or by extension of the intestines, and these two methods arise from two causes:
or by percussion, or by jumping, or by pressure, or from the lifting of a burden, and by similar things;
And the signs when it is by section of the syfac are that there is both pain and swelling in length, and it does not come immediately And the abscesses are equal in size until towards the belly, because the spleen presses the intestines.
And the sign is when the socket is inflamed, that it makes an immediate sharp pain, and the swelling is diverse, sometimes the skin is pale, and this is because of the escape of the intestine and the stiffness of the socket.</start_of_turn
And never is the bone moved with the intestine, and is retained when it is pressed, and makes great pain for the patient, even when it is pressed.</start_of_turn
And in these treatments with fire and fear, for it is known that they must be cautious.
And the way of this work is that if you command or patient that he bend the intestine to his hand in the wound, if it can return there again. Then hold his collar between your hands, and keep his legs still;
Then stretch the limb upwards, and clench all the skin of the buttocks long Then hold the bowels open to the size of a thumb according to what you must see to open the wound, and be like that which causes it not to move
Then uncover the spleen that is under the skin of the buttocks, until the white spleen is discovered throughout
Then take your thumb and index finger and place them on that which teaches you the position, between the white splint which is above the leather of the egg, and between the second splint, and withdraw that which is behind the egg, and between the second splint.
And thus move the right hand from the knuckles of the fingers, and extend the white splint above your left hand, and hold the egg against all the splinting towards the belly; Command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and loosen that which is behind the ligament.
And look if there is any intestine or white splint hard involved, and if you find nothing, if the egg is soft against the belly;
Then take a needle or if there is thick thread made of X threads, and pass it through the back part of the scapula, which is behind the skin of the armpits. Then the size, then tie the head of the dislocation which appears from the threads, until there are three threads remaining. Then assemble the bones one over the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the scapula, as we have said which is behind the skin of the armpits, with a strong thread of two parts Then wrap the head of the dislocation in thread and bind it firmly with two parts, so that no blood vessels that nourish them can enter, except for the incision that we have made. And put the thread straight according to the first thread which is two finger-widths long, and after these two fingers leave the scapula which is behind the skin of the armpits the greater part of a palm And afterwards, according to the roundness of the egg, which is carried.
Then grasp in the part which is under the skin of the joints, as much as it hangs loose, and bow it, as we have said before
Then mix coarse wool with oil, and put it on the wound, and put in the thread that we have said. And never cauterize the flesh except as we have said, after the incision, in doubt of the discharge of blood. For this often happens, and leave the thread as long as it wants to slip for itself
and if it persists at the shoulder, if it be raised from hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it wants to slip
Then cure the wound in another way, until it is completely healed
Of hernias of the intestines.
In this chapter, I have never seen anyone cure it with iron.
And the old ones say that it is made as the twig which is bound to the nut, in part as you bind the blood vessels, after the size above lightly on the outside.
Then hold them firmly in place, and cure the abscess of that which overpowers, until the blood vessels cease to bleed
And cure as we have said, until it is healed.
Never comes rupture in anger, as we have said, and open the wounds
and do not break any intestines as bones, and if there are any, that is bad, and repair them at all hours.
and if it stays too long in this place, if he believes the wound or the hernia, until the intestines break;
And this comes from the stretching of the hip, which is angled, as we have said, because it is extended, then is softened and filled with air;
and the remedy for this is by cautery, as we have mentioned before.</start_of_turn>
and never is cured by iron in this manner.</start_of_turn> and that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then grasp the limb from the root and stretch it out wide as much as is necessary according to the quantity of three fingers.</start_of_turn
and then draw out the hip that is below the skin that covers it, then take hold of the edge of the limb and pull the limb outwards until the bony part of the hip is exposed.</start_of_turn
And press upon the belly, then cut the two thighs appearing from the hip bone on the top of the right thigh, and cut both of them.
Then pull out the right thigh, and do not cover the hip bone or extend the knee or anything else, as I told you in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines. Then treat it with the treatment for wounds.
Then treat it with the treatment for wounds. And when you cauterize the hair, if the wound closes and heals the wound, as long as it is whole.
The swelling is confined, and has no apparent cause in the course of treatment, and the cautery is useless in this situation, and more proximate to health.
of the softening of the skin of the nails
Many times is the skin of the joints softened in baths of hot water, because the bones that are within are softened, and it is evident to see
And it is necessary, when one sees it cured, to make the patient sit up on his back, and to support the softened skin on the natural skin
Then gather two layers of leather at a staple, and if you see, first close the superfluous layer of leather and soften it at three staples or four firmly.
Then stretch between the staples, and tie the cure as with other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
Dou chastrement.
The wounds which are scraped in our laws, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of them in this book;
and are only necessary for two methods:
one is that the patient looks at the wound when asked and that the cure is applied to the wound itself
and the other is that often we have seen patients scratched by animals such as dogs and goats, cats and other animals
I say therefore that the cautery is performed in two ways: or by traction, or by incision.
In that which we do it by traction, we must keep the part to be treated in hot water, until the skin is softened and limp. then grasp it with your hand, until it is firm and you can no longer feel it
Of the size of the cautery: you must hold it firmly, and press the skin of the parts at your left hand, then bind up the dressing, and keep pressure on each wound until you have well secured them
and leave no wound that is soft or bloody which has escaped from the vessels;
And this method of treatment is more silent than that which is made by traction, because with traction it adheres by chance to nothing of the bones, whereas it desires luxury.
then cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
of hermaphrodites.
Hermaphrodism is in two ways as at home: one if between the two genitals appears as the nature of a woman, or there are hair, and sometimes in court it urinates.</start_of_turn
And the other way if it is in a woman, and has on the navel as a penis and two nails.
And the treatment of men and women is if you carry the offensive tumors away, and cure them as other wounds.</start_of_turn
In the second method, of those who urinate from the skin of the genitals, if there is no cure.</start_of_turn>
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sur la partie naturelle, tant qu’elle est trop lourde pour voir; Tentigene is a weight hanging from the natural part, as long as it is too heavy to see; and many women have had as much as an arm, and that is the cure.
It is necessary to hold the surplus of the weight at your hand or on the nails, and to support it lightly;
do not go too close to the wound, for blood will come out, and that is worse than the disease itself; then the cure of other cures when it is healed
and another weight that comes from the mouth of the marrow, and the spleen, and by chance a jump upwards, and it is like a cow's jaw, and for this reason it is called the old "coward disease". If you perceive that it has slipped, as we have said, hold the limb steady until it is healed.
Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not clearly known, or the opening is too small. for it is natural by birth, or by accident from illness that it comes about;
for it is natural by birth, or by accident from illness that it comes about; or it is caused by a tight band, or a soft swelling or spasm, and is done by pressure in the marrow, or the ribs, or the bowels, or otherwise
and hinders conception, and birth, and by chance flowers to have;
and the knowledge of this is by the sight of the belly.
If swelling appears nearby, if you wish to test the two limbs or the root.</start_of_turn
if it is soft and close to two lives, if you hurry, and break it there:
put your two thumbs together and the woman be on her back, spreading her legs wide open
Then are the two levers formed, as long as the subtle syfac is round and the staple is overfull.
Then take wax, and mix it with oil, and put it on the limb, and hold the woman at home close to each joint, so that it does not burst.
And if the scapula is hard and thick, it is proper that you grasp it at the edge resembling a leaf of myrtle.
If the staple is of bone, if you suspend it at the hip and grasp it;
and have the medicines ready, such as chamomile, dragon’s blood, incense, and a lot of eggs together;
Then mix in a large dose of lead plaster, so that the wound does not burst
and let it be long, and mix in some dry linen cloth
Then let other cures be done while he is still sane.
And when there is blunt trauma to the limb, if you cover it according to this manner, it is not necessary to make incisions.</start_of_turn For the blunt trauma in the limb, do not touch the bone.</start_of_turn
des emorroides. Emorrhages are bursting of veins which, without treatment, are almost always fatal; and when old, become thick and clotted.
And as we have mentioned in the preceding sections the signs and symptoms, I will now speak of those which signify a cure.</start_of_turn>
I say that in old emboli, when they are softened in the marrow, and cannot be felt, if they are not treated by fire.
Those which are at the root of the marrow can be felt, and these can be cured.
It is therefore necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then keep the abscess closed with pins, and press on its roots, then sprinkle on restraining medicines like acaice and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things.</start_of_turn
Then bind her parts until an hour has passed, then immerse her in cold water.</start_of_turn
If blood flows away, if the patient sits in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel, of barley and other things, then take barley flour, and mix with honey and oil, and apply it on his back.
And if it sticks, that is good. If not, if he has wind in his belly and has swellings on his back and has vomiting;
Then take linen and moisten it with the juice of plantain or with the juice of elderberry with vinegar, and make him vomit.
And when the abscess is rested, if you can cure the limb of its swelling as long as it is healthy;
and the one called “albathir” is red, and is like a rough beard, if you cover it as I have said previously. Then he must be treated until he is healed.
Many kinds of abscess come into the marsh, such as carbuncles and perforated abscesses and herpes and swellings and fistulas and hemorrhoids and cautery abscesses, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the previous division.</start_of_turn
Therefore, I must say that I die in this treatment the abscess that comes up in the armpit, which is not just an abscess that collects pus;
And if you see the work of iron, if you see that the abscess is already coming to an end at its beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it turns red when you see it.</start_of_turn> Therefore do not hasten to pierce [the abscess], but make me wait until the pain is eased.</start_of_turn
Then make the patient sit on a chair, and give him two small stools or he will lean forward, and support him on his back and join his limbs so that they are aligned with the limb;
And let his thighs be spread wide, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a strong thread.
Then bend the knee towards his chest costing, and bring the instrument which we hold in our hand to cover the mouth of the mare, for after this comes the form
And you must know that when you bring this instrument to cover the mouth of the mare, that you must first test the depth of the wound, so that what enters between the instrument and the wound does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient And if the instrument is large, if you must cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause pain
And he must put the horn of the instrument at its base, and hold the instrument.
When the abscess bursts open, and we make a hold of the hand below, if he covers the head with the thumb and index finger,
When the wound is cleaned out, if he covers the wound with a bandage, you must put in it some soft lint or cotton soaked in rose oil or dry green oil.
Put a little pressure on the wound at the bottom of the vein, and put a layer of lint over the vein and over the piece of cloth, and fill with water or mallow which has been boiled;
Then keep it bandaged for two days following this, until it is healed;
And never lift the bruise and wound with a clustery of water and honey, and then with water or radish and chamomile long shall be cooked. Then return to the swelling.
And if the wound is closed in the cavity, one must take care not to burn it, but cure it as we have said in the division.
De l’enfantement. Master is first at play that he knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down and desire to smell the navel:
Then the child is born with force to be delivered Then the saches that the childbirth has according to the natural figure, and the head comes out first, and the second with it
And when you see these signs, if you must press lightly on his belly, so that the child is thrust out;
For when he falls on his head, if he is accompanied by a second person, and the marrow of his superfluities is broken by violent impact.
and this which comes from elsewhere does not come naturally.
For it never comes from its bones, but comes from force of bone or limb, hand or from the belly, or even from the throat, and is turned by chance from his collar and by other harmful postures.
if he is aware of the dance that it should be discreet in these matters, and he avoids error and deception, and I will show you all the postures in which one must aid him
When the mistress comes upon his head by natural issue, and the mistress cries out and the hand is weak, if she sits on a chair, or the women hold her;
And thus arose its nature of oil or fenugreek, or else between its two, the small cubical shape which is its form. And split the secondine, and hold at its nail as long as the moisture which is in its core escapes outwards;
And press the belly of the woman as long as the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to instill in the woman a purging of fenugreek with sesame oil
then make her vomit and expectorate of phlegm, and keep her mouth and nose covered for an hour. if now the fetus has descended.
And if her two hands issue fiercely, if you can, make her lie down gently and softly.</start_of_turn> And if they cannot enter, if put the woman on her seat, and hold her feet high. Then loosen the seat on the ground, and hold the woman, so that she does not move at the loosening;
and if her hands cannot enter, and her belly is dead, if she grasps the hands at the waist that are put before, and pulls out the child, and keep them even.
From the issue of the child on his feet. When the child comes on its feet, if you can push upwards; and then twist it back and forth, until it is even.
Then take hold of the feet and extend them back and forth.</start_of_turn>
Can he jump up to his knees, if the order has commanded, and make him vomit from the congestion; If he can jump up to his knees, if God wills it.</start_of_turn>
If it is not forced, as we have said, if the limb hangs too far forward or backward, as long as it is in accordance with the natural figure. For in such a case it is readily done.</start_of_turn>
And if he does not vomit, if as we have seen, say to take muscle powder of almonds, and oil of poppies, and beeswax, and grind everything together in mortar.</start_of_turn and put on the woman's nature inside and expel this swelling, then make her sit in hot water until the ribs are cold;
and when she is wet through, make her wear a collar of myrrh, and put on her clothes, and leave her for an hour.</start_of_turn Then make her sit on a chair, then make her vomit and strain her mouth and nose, and take her pulse gently, for now the fever is coming down.</start_of_turn>
because of the discharge from the child on his genitals. When the limb comes in this fashion, if he puts his hands together and together; then either he should lean his head down on his collar, and hang his head down, and leave him still; and fold his hands together and together, and then take his hands in his belly, and press his thumbs against the ribs, until they appear in the belly and if the limb does not jump, if he takes his hands and moves them, then move his hands up his belly, and then take your hands away; and there you will see the limb straight and together. And instruct the woman to hold him still until the limb is set.</start_of_turn>
And from the issue of the child who comes out with a large hand during I command thee to feign an engagement to restore the limb. If it cannot be restored, then raise the limb and alert me.
If it still will not alert, then grasp it firmly in my hand and withdraw the foot from beneath it
then restore the muscle I have mentioned before.
and if it still does not yield, then seat it upon my lap and then attempt to restore the limb again. And leave it as nature intended, and make it expel naturally, and command her to remain still until it is cured
From the birth of the child on his shoulder, and he has spread out his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back. I command you that you grasp her hand tightly, then twist it back and forth, and then gently pull it out
And when they are even, if put on the fleshy elevation and oil, as we have said, then command that it move freely and steadily.
And when you have done this, if you place it on a seat, and command it to grasp; it will discharge. From this same measure at all the second degree.
From this same measure at all the second degree. When force comes in this manner at the second, if the second grasps your finger, until the moisture is gone;
and if it hangs on its face and on its neck, if you grasp the tumor, that it should not be retained, and the person will die
then loosen the child, as you have placed it, and command the woman not to grasp it again
it must be reset immediately. Therefore if it is easily done. Many times in childbirth do twins emerge, but never three or four at once; and this is not an unusual thing, and often happens. Two things are unusual and cause death, and that is when it is doubted or feared
Two things are unusual and cause death, and that is when it is doubted or feared I know that when they are numerous, they are often torn away by the force of the lip which devours them, which is linked to the spleen
and never naturally like all the others, as we have said
If it comes loose suddenly, as we have said, and the cure is as we have said, and be slight and gentle in what it does; And make haste as it were to health. Moreover.
At times they are formed in the marrow of I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more, up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of the thumb and index finger, and it must be supposed that the dance of faith will overcome all these things, for in this way similar things happen. If you do as it is commanded, it will be good.
From childhood death.
When you cure the woman of the dead child or the pregnant one, as I said in the division, and there is no flight, and you are compelled by the work of your hands;… It must be supposed that the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or is not in danger of death;…
If it is known that the woman is lying on her back, and her arms are bent at the elbow and her legs are lifted.
and the minister should take hold of her two hands, or she should be bound to the bed if she is not treated with the descending of the child.
then wipe her mouth with moist oil mixed with alum and rue and linseed seeds, and then anoint her hands with these oils and these substances
then put her limbs in the bath lightly, then command her to move or she will hold the ointments that are convenient for this, and take care that the child does not appear to descend from her head
if she feels the ointments in her armpits or neck or mouth or on her chest or on her beard or in her hair or near her ribs, and if she descends from her shoulder, she will feel or pluck and have pale cheeks
And it is fitting that he grasps the ointment in his right hand, and puts the elbow between his two hands of the left, and holds it all his might, and pins the ointment to neither of these parts that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
Then pinches another ointment, or if you have to take part of it out, so that the extraction is even;
And then extend it evenly by moving from side to side, because it is to be held firmly in place, and that the ointment teeth hold, as it is in this form
And if any part of it remains, if one sees some of its two oils, and holds them in that part, and treats the other part
If he does not move from that point, if you put on this ointment or higher up, make this for as long as it comes out entirely.
If one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring them back by stretching, then you must cover over the drapeil until they are both gone; Then put the thumb in the joint of the wrist or the elbow, and then you must do the same with the other hand, and hold both feet.
If the child’s arm is thick and is twisted at the exit, or if there is swelling assembled, then you must put the bony prominence between your two thumbs, and make the swelling and draw out the pain. Or you will bind it to the instrument which is called “almidach,” from which the form comes with the instruments or bandage which is after this
And thus make him lie down with a great natural inclination.
And then hold the bones firm like a clamp, and if the dislocation leaps forward, it will strain at the forceps, if it be fractured, until the moisture that is or has issued forth;
and if it cannot rest, if the limb breaks into pieces at the bone that you put in
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, if you must pierce as much as the moisture comes out.
And if it is swollen above its feet, if the attraction is slight, and the movement towards the mouth of the marrow is less arduous.
And if it is bruised in the belly or the side, if you must extract it with a drape covering the hand; make the belly or the side until the moisture that is there comes out.
And if another limb is affected by bone swelling, and the head of the dislocation remains fixed, if you see the limb flex from the armpit downwards, grasp it as far as the armpit; then grasp it with one or two fingers, and pull forcefully.
if the armpit is retracted by a thick scab that has come away, if you are unable to pull it out, you must administer oily and fatty things. give poultices, and soak in hot water softened and moistening.
If the swelling is on the chest, and you set it even, if you administer what we have said for a living child;
and if it does not improve, if you pull it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second part behind.
And when you have done this, if anything like what we have said above comes to pass in the marsh;
And when you have done this, if anything like what we have said above comes to pass in the marsh; if blood comes out, even if it is restrained by the water, and if there are other cures.
And I saw a woman in whose womb two infants were conceived, and as soon as one was born, the other expelled it. After a long time, there came a swelling in her belly, and it burst open, and it began to swell greatly
I called for help, and I thought for a long time, and I could not stop the bleeding.
I put on a strong dressing, and blood came out, and after a while another one. I marvel at mouth, for this belly has no bone.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I wish the wound, and in treating bones, as long as the woman is in a better state; and that she does not go limp from pain in the limb; for this is a great evil.
and I have never known this chapter except for the fact that when the master finds a strange thing, he must give aid.
Then comes the form of pressure, as we have said in the books;
And at two returns as two heads of two limbs. However, the head of the limb should be more flexible than the restricting ligature, and be made of ivory or gut.
and be of such length that it reaches from the root of the tooth to the middle of the gum line of the upper teeth; and be long enough to reach from the socket of the tooth to the middle of the gum line of the lower teeth and between the two limbs be two ligatures of the same length, which are to be placed in one and the other, from the middle of the length or a little more;
and these two ligatures are held in the mouth of the patient when the two heads are twisted
Another form, which is more flexible and lighter, is made of ivory or gut, according to the shape of the nails; And there are two shoulders which are loosened, as you see, from a palm long, and two must be wide.
And when you see opening the arm with all the instruments, if you make the woman sit with her head lying low, her arms hanging and her legs outstretched, then take the two shoulders and join them together in the arm, and hold the head of the instruments between her thighs.</start_of_turn> Then open your hand with all the instruments, if you have made them equally tense, as much as you see opening the mouth of the arm, until it makes what it wants.</start_of_turn>
These instruments are all moistened, and are multiplied by their appearance.</start_of_turn When you look at them appear, so much the more urgent is the work, and the higher as their quantity.
If one does not fear the instrument except when it appears, for its need is not easily dispensable
When the second [tooth] is retained in infancy, if you command the patient to retain his tongue, and then make her spit out on her own, and you hold her hands to her mouth and nose; And if she spits out for that, well is that.
If not, I take a pot, and make a perforation or incision, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the mare, such as alum, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and century; All these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water over the fire;
Then put a caustic or burn the mouth of the pot, and the other head in the mouth of the mare, and hold them tight until the vapor comes from inside the mare.
Then make them vomit, as we have said If the second joint downwards is affected.
And if it remains after this treatment, and is not better, as the master orders, let her wipe her left hand with olive oil of sesam or with alum, and then put it back in its place, and give her the second dose And when she has found it, if she grasps and extends it towards the front and back, so that the mare does not cry out at the extraction
but must move slightly towards the right and left, and then treat her If it comes and will dry out.
And if the mouth is filled with pus, it is known that we have said the cure of vomiting, and fumigation with herbs.
and if it is not from all that we have said, if you do not find it there, keep that you do not use it for food;
but it is necessary that what is in the mouth of the pus be bound to the belly of the woman, and then be cauterized with oil tetra-pharmacon if it comes back and will dry out, and will come again;
however, when it comes again, if there comes a bad smell from the stomach and the head, and causes the patient pain. If it is thus that fumigations are to be applied in this case.
None of the ancients have proven the efficacy of fumigation with rue and dried figs.
The form of the instrument in which we fumigate the woman at the retention of flowers and the secondine if it be this:
It is like a wasp, and put the head under the fire, and the large hairs over the fire;
Or the fumigations on charcoal, and the smoke until it is consumed, and start another one.
Many children are born who do not have the sense of smell, and they have it stifled by a subtle spasm of the flesh When it comes to the dance that it perceives that spasm at its root, and does not perceive any acute spasm, and keep the tension that it does not touch it
Then apply soft wool soaked in wine and oil, and then treat the wound until it is healed.
If you doubt that it will not stay in place, if you put or withdraw a sponge of lead, and leave your hands free, and be patient as long as the child sees the wound alert in bed.
And never comes this stamp of sweat from the wound or the abscess; if you cover that sweat: if it is healed, as we have said of the amount of pus
The fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodulations, and those that come from the root of the foundation are swollen, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or several
and when that nodulation is old, if it is renewed, and incites moisture, white or thick pus, and never are these fistulas harmless;
And are known by those who make egestion, or by vomiting or diarrhea when the patient makes egestion, and by sudden leaps or bounds.
And if there are fistulas that reach the bladder, and reach half of the thigh; Reaching as far as the hip joint and even to the knee bone.
And thus one knows the fistula that persists at the base and does not break through: And that you swallow your thumb or base, and see a thin needle of spider or iron in the fistula when there is no swelling
And if there is swelling, if you see a attempt of a thin swelling or a horsehair, as long as you feel the attempt or the hair at your thumb;
If you do not understand, and there is no pain, no vomiting, no diarrhea, nor wind, as we have said. if the urine does not flow freely; then you must take action quickly.
And when the fistula persists until the bladder or the urine duct, if in a leap the urine escapes, and cannot be retained by medicines.
if it has gone as far as the hip joint, if the vein is about to burst open; if there is no swelling and no pain, if it has simply slipped out of place, then there is no need for medicine or treatment by fomentation
and in these fistula-like conditions there is no effective cure except for work and the disdain of baseless hopes that intervene
in the case where it is neither acute nor chronic, there is hope of recovery through the application of iron, as I have shown, and the patient lies between your hands on his back;
And he holds his legs up to his buttocks, and inclines his buttocks towards his belly. Then he attempts to stretch, or to lean forward if there is discomfort, until he feels relief or the attempt itself brings relief.
If the patient feels pain in the root, if you must bite your thumb index, if he feels it again, then you must know that he has perceived it
Or that it is discovered or that you feel between your thumb and the index finger the pulse or the nerve, then stretch that it is persistent If it does not slip away immediately, you will not be able to heal it
Every time we can well heal without them, but this is not the case here
And the aid with which it is done, if it is done carelessly, the fire cautery must be scaled according to the size of the fistula, as it is said beforehand. And the surrounding area of the fistula must be scaled all around until it comes down to the base; Do it once or twice, until you see that these hairs have been burnt, which are like the bristles of a brush
And then it must be treated with soft sponges, until the hair has come out, and then it must be treated with oil that covers the hair and joins.
If he is still sane, that is good.
If not, it will not be healed otherwise.
And if it is attempted between and does not reach the root which is or should be at the base, and between your thumb and the attempt there must be a thick covering of hair or silk, and you will see the fistula at that which covers the wound If the head of the fistula approaches the attempt, and remains ahead before the burn, and after the burn is applied as long as it comes up to the head of the attempt. and the attempt will be delivered, and will recover
then take away those burns that seem like a bristle of oil, and nothing will remain of them.
And if he will not go without force, and if you are between him and the work, if you cauterize with fire or medicine that is strong.
For fire cautery consists of two bones connected. namely, the burning of these hairs surrounding it, and the evacuation of blood and the drying out of moisture.
then the treatment of soft boils buried under the skin or broken in pieces, until they leak pus, and is sufficient to burn the hair in the leak
Then treat the wound of the wounds sweating profusely with dry charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, if it is well and does not return.
When it is restored, if it is well and does not return, and if a fistula comes up to the root of the bone, and is loosened from the flesh, if the thumb or the root is moved, inquire about that.</start_of_turn>
If you feel the attempt, and between two is the cloth or the sponge or charcoal, or it is near to pierce, if there is no greater hope but the way of escape and of trust, by the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize as we have said, or you bind it tightly until it is healed, or if you wish, you put it to the fire if there are attempts and cure it as before.
And do not go too deep, that you do not cover the dwelling that holds the foundation, and bring out the egestion in the natural way.</start_of_turn> Then treat it as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Then treat it as we have said.</start_of_turn> By chance, if you are healthy, or you loosen that covering and the mucus then that it is cut from its roots, or by force or by some pointed instrument. then remove that fleshy thing which is in the wound, as you wish; then study to restore the wound and to stop the fistula in the lower part of the root
then study to restore the wound and to stop the fistula in the lower part of the root if there is something more serious with the patient.
And never are there fistulas according to this method. and when you touch the attempt in the fistula, and it is either at the root or costs the underside of the skin, if you take a pointed attempt at the head according to this form: And there is always a thread torn in two, and you must pull the attempt all the way through the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is a man in the margin of the bone at the root, then draw out the thread of that which is pierced, so that you swallow your bone or root.
Draw out the head of the thread and reunite the two bones together, and strain one against the other, and leave it hanging one or two inches.</start_of_turn>
And do not restrain it until these hairs which are between two bones, and which cause pain, disappear.</start_of_turn
Then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.</start_of_turn>
If the fistula does not perforate, if you force it to pierce in every way you can, it will not be too much. For it is not right to force it too tightly with the stitches, and then cure it as we have said, while it is still healthy.</start_of_turn>
The shape of the spiny spine from which the fistula is made if it is moist and soft from a part and trenchant.</start_of_turn And on the other hand not, for this we must not do, as you see here:</start_of_turn
Wounds are of two kinds: Or else they are within the foundation, like grains of resin; and there are small and large ones, and in direct proportion with the blood, and there is one or more of them, and they push out the foundation and head of the foundation.
But those which are pushed out have much moisture, and are clotted with blood or a yellow citron or blood, and have the color of urine.
And the cure for those which are within the foundation is that you command the patient to cough forcefully so that the foundation comes out, and they will appear like threads if you are in a hurry, and you have nails or hold it with your finger, then you must break it at its roots
If the joint uncouples does not hold by its moisture, if you take hold of it with a drapeil or a bandage, or with a piece of chammel; If you pull it out again, then hold it firmly, and sprinkle over it warm powder instead of cautery. or you burn it if it is said or by the physician of cautery, because the other cures are as effective when they are sound;
and if the foundation cannot bear, if you bite the patient with a biting and rough plaster to uncover what is or is under the foundation, so that it can recover openly cannot the patient endure it, and if the thread is strong of the foundation, if it is a light cure
cannot the patient endure it, and if the thread is strong of the foundation, if it is a light cure And let him grasp them at your finger or has pliers, and hold them close, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed, and that he fear not the incision by fire. If you must bring the suture back to this method:
If you must bring the suture back to this method: Take a thread and pass it through a needle, and then pass the thread under and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist two threads of the thread from the needle, and if it is thick;
And strain the thread taut, then knot the thread, and pull out the needle, and make sure that all the others are in place, and leave one to correct the excess of blood
Then put upon the foundation a soft drape of oil rose or beeswax, and put upon the foundation, and command the patient to rest.
Then leave them until they ache, and when they ache, if the treatment for swelling and other treatments, as long as they are well.
when the fire is finished or the foundation is firm</start_of_turn> There are often dry fevers in the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is not worth.</start_of_turn If you suspect that you have reached the point of a spasm or a nail at the edge of the nail, which does not allow it to dry; then treat it until it is healed if necessary.</start_of_turn>
and if it does not heal, if you repeat the scraping more vigorously than before, until it bleeds, and be scraped away.</start_of_turn Then treat it until it is well.</start_of_turn><end>
indeed. Formice is a small outgrowth that appears in front of the bone, and will bleed freely.</start_of_turn
And never does the true warmth touch him, and he feels as if dead from fear, and comes throughout the body, and more hands than in any other place.
If the pain is great, take a goose quill or a strong vulture quill, and put that quill on the fear, as long as the circle turns the fear all around; Then twist your hand all around the quill as long as you can encompass the fear all around, and put it under the root, and pull out the fear from its roots.
And if you see that it is done with a needle or iron in this fashion, and be discreet of your steps and cautious of your hands. Do not be afraid, for holding at the side and pressing will suffice
And if you see, if you cauterize the fear, if it is in front or chief of the cautery.
Never make a blister of silver or gold, or of melted lead or millet.
and never make a blister of these small and large things, according to the things which accompany them. Those who are feeble and painful in the treatment of children are small.
Those who are feeble and painful in the treatment of children are small. Their form is small and great if it is due to a wide belly, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
if there is a discharge or the belly is tied, if you see it, and if you pull it out or pierce it;
and if there is a hole in the rib or in the side; and in the one there are two holes, and in the other one there is one hole.
and if the belly or the owner puts medicines in a bladder of gut or parchment, or if you pierce all around the holes, and between each hole put one must of space, and then put in these holes one strong thread of strong thread twisted in the shape of the cross or in the shape of an anchor, and reassemble the belly as if it were a needle And when the medicine is dense, if the thread has been placed in front of a strong wire, then clench.
It is like the shape of a circle
And let the medicine neither too hot nor too cold, and join the head of the clamp with oil or balm of egg, or something similar, and tighten it lightly Then grasp the minister with both hands together, until it is well seen, then withdraw the clamp, and leave the patient’s legs in place, and if the medicine breaks through, if it can be helped; And if it sleeps all night long, if it is more useful.
If he sees it in the disease of falling of the belly, and the physician hastens to go out, if he recommences as long as he is well.</start_of_turn>
And if swelling appears on the surface or foundation, or abscess, if the clamp is as subtle as for a child;
And thus is the form of a subtle blister on which the skin is strained:
We have already said in the previous section the treatment of wounds.
or you may say the treatments of hands and surgery, according to their accomplishment
I say that wounds are diverse depending on the way they are made, and depending on the parts of the body from which they are made, and how they are made
The things which are done for wounds are made with the bite of a stone, and the size of a nail or a staple, or of an arrow or a tube or a saw, or similar things;
or they are made according to the conditions of the flesh, as for example a wound that bites on the chin, or on the head, or the arm, or the belly, or the liver, or similar parts
And I shall tell you the treatment of a chest wound, and I shall begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come back to you in this chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes or an abscess bursts, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is not from a stone wound or similar things, and the skin is entirely ruptured and the wound is large, and you doubt the depth of the wound, do not hesitate to cauterize. if you do so too soon after the wound, and there is still blood coming from the wound, or if the blood is flowing in the opposite direction to the part that is affected;
and listen to the patient's swelling from wine and meat.
and if he does not recover, if he is vomiting his food, and does not drink wine, does not eat meat;
and take out the wound, if there is pus coming from it, cover it with soft cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in styptic wine.
If there is no clot at the wound’s base, if you put a bandage on the wound when it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, dust, etc., I will tell you about it later.
If blood has moved, put on some ointment until it has healed.
And if the wound is large like the size of a nail and similar, and the layers do not want to stick together by tension, if you join them together with stitches, as I will say for wounds on the belly, from the stitches.</start_of_turn>
If the wound is exposed to bone, and pus, and only holds at a point, if it is grasped, then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hair that has fallen out in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat fatty foods, such as testicles and bread, as well as poultry, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
And if you find hair or decay on the bone, if it grasps the bone firmly, extract it forcefully, then cure it.</start_of_turn>
If there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without support, and it cannot be held by medicines, if the artery is displaced, if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. If that does not help, if you must cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, suffice with a mild treatment: And put on this powder that will harden as soon as it comes into contact with blood
The way of using the powder is as follows Take an incense and mix it with a part of the powder With two parts of dragon's blood chalk three parts, and the powder finely, and apply to the wound, and hold firmly until it has healed well and reunited with all its blood;
And then bind it well, and leave it loose, if it does not swell. for one does not keep the medicine until it is healed.
And never do we make this charcoal burn only, when we have no incense or blood of a dragon, but only when the wound has not moved.
And if it has moved the wound, even in this state, if one does not put on this powder immediately.
but put on some astringents or poultices made of barley flour soaked in water and honey, until it stops bleeding then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
and if a bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, if you have grasped the wound carefully
I will tell you later about the breaks of the head
of the wound of the head.</start_of_turn>
The wound comes with the head and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the neck or the artery is cut.</start_of_turn
If that is the nerve, if there is nothing else to be done, let the cure alone, and do not put anything restrictive, for it does no good and makes the nerve shrink. And do not put anything rough on the wound, for the substance of the nerve is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most sensitive part of the limb
But if the medicine is soft, like warm water with sweet oil, and mixed with rosemary oil, and vinegar washed in sweet water, and other stones of the earth, and moist compresses.
If the wound is large, if the bone and the surrounding tissue are bent, then cure it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and closed and full of pus, if the opening or more downwards lies;
If the artery is cut, and blood flows out, if swelling, and pus, and cautery must be mixed together is
And if the bristles of the beard are cut, or the hair of the head, and the cord is held, by which the meat goes, if the hair on the edge of the beard is cut, do not touch the beard but return it to its natural shape. Then the pain will subside, and leave them for some days, and cure them with liberal applications until they are healed;
If the wound has made an indentation in the bone, if the marrow; and if there are pieces of bone, if the marrow is split, you must leave as much as possible of the wound open, and keep it clean and aligned
And if the wound is fresh, if powder is sprinkled on the wound as I have said And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, if the cure be as I have said in this chapter.</start_of_turn
If it is from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, if you see that the wound is spitting blood rapidly, the patient cannot remain still. Then the wound is deadly;
if it is not deep and is fresh throughout its extent, if you do not immediately put powder on it, do not bind it up with the blood until it has clotted, and renew the application of the powder, and comfort the patient but if there is an attractive dressing, and you tie it twice tightly;
if there is no dressing, put in the wound a great deal of cotton to absorb the moisture, and make the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more If there is no spasm, do not tremble male of body, nor stretching of limbs; And when you see the bones set, if the wound is saved.</start_of_turn> Cure the wounds of sutures and others, as long as they are healed;
and if it cannot heal, and there is an opening, then leave the wound open that there is fistula.</start_of_turn
If the cure is as it should be.</start_of_turn> And if the wound is an incision of sword or knife, and it is simple, or more so on the front or back, if the cure of what is in front.</start_of_turn is great, of stitching.</start_of_turn
And if it is small, like dust, and is lodged in the bone, and breaks into pieces, if the wound is deep, and the surrounding tissues are severed if they are loosened. and if they are not loosened, if it leaves the wound open, if it aligns the extractions.
and for other wounds, as for other members, the judge will determine as we have said
as other limbs are the judge of such things as we have said.
The breaking of the belly is great and mean and small.
There is no greater wound than a wound of the intestine, or no less dangerous than the intestines themselves, because of the introduction of worms.
And the suture is more painful, and no wound is better than a great one, because in this case we must return the intestines many times to close them;
Forasmuch the intestines swell greatly that they feel the fruit, if they return to the point, it is worth little to make an incision; for in that case one should retain the intestines in their place rather than make another incision.
And the wounds of the intestine that are in the belly are in three ways:
The two common incisions are in the belly and the incision of other wounds from bone to bone and two other incisions are common with other wounds;
and all of them are more pure with the incision of the belly, and I will say one thing and leave it at that.
I say that when the wound is small and there is nothing wrong with the intestines, and there is something to be done, this is by one of the two methods Or for the slightness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen by the fruit.
And when it is cold, swallow the cold in part slowly: wet a sponge or I make a towel wet in cold water only, or thou wilt burn with cold water stinging and pricking and spiking, and raise the intestines until the swelling is bony
and never do thou make this wine restraining, and it is mute that thou art sure to cure by swelling
and when thou seest the swelling depart, if moisten the intestine with water or elevate and twist and soften be cooked, for by this is aligned the entrance to everything.
If it cannot enter, if one makes a hole in the wound with the instrument, we grasp the blood clots.
The first treatment is to make the wound small, for we must not cut excessively without necessity; it should not be large.</start_of_turn>
This is the instrument for cutting.</start_of_turn
If the cut is too deep in the curve and does not yield, and when this happens, take the form of this.</start_of_turn And when the wound is swollen and the intestines protrude, if you stop bleeding in accordance with the natural form in its own place, you will have done well, for this is worth doing.
When the wound is large and is in the lower part of the belly, if you must manage the patient lying on their back, and raise their legs above their head.</start_of_turn And if it is in the lower part of the belly, put the head and the heel higher than the lower parts, and in the same way if the swelling of the belly is in one of the two lower parts, put your hand under what is above so that the upper part is higher than the lower part.</start_of_turn
And so it is necessary to administer what I have said in large and moist wounds.
And small wounds do this that you have noticed, then take hold of your hands I administer pity which holds all the way around with its hand, and gather the layers together.
This is the common method of stitching, and take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the wound's size, then leave a little space at the edge of the wound, and pierce a needle or there put a strong thread. And pierce the two holes in the leather with the two holes in the sponge, which is to soak the leather through, until you make it pierce from that part, and gather the two heads of the sponge together the three together
Then the strain of a double thread around the needle of two parts, then unite the two ends of the wound immediately, and then leave one space of an inch, and insert another needle.
Then tie the knot of the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease until you have made as many knots as you have seen fit for the needles, until the whole wound is secured.</start_of_turn>
And let the needles be neither too thick nor too thin, for the thick needles will hold all the hair, and the thin needles will not penetrate well.</start_of_turn Therefore it is recommended that they be of moderate size.</start_of_turn>
And do not press the needles too far into the hair and skin, for they will hold and tear the wound before the suture is complete.</start_of_turn
And then grasp the head of the nails, so that they do not bleed the patient at night; and put a bandage or cloth over the head of the nails to hold them, and leave them until the wound has healed.
And this method of stitching with nails is more convenient for small wounds, because there is a nail or two under the skin.
The second stitching is common, and it is that you join the two nails of leather and the two nails of silk together with a nail or there is one thick middle thread;
And when you have pierced these three nails together, if you leave the nail at the start, in the manner in which you began to sew, it will hold the edges together
And put space between each stitch the thickness of a candle stub
These wounds are seen in the home, and I sewed a wound which had a horn or belly, which was injured by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm of great size, and there were intestines well two palms of great size, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I will restore the gut when it has been outside for twenty-four hours, and it was closed for fifteen days, and I treated it, and it healed.
And the blood flowed so abundantly that it seemed he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not care for the ointment, because I was in a place where there was none, neither medicine; and put more oil on the wound two times a day, and poured honey on it until it healed
Or you will tell me two ways of sewing:
Take the needle and pass it through from the back of the part until it reaches the center;
When it has pierced the thumb on the right side, if the head of the thumb is swollen or bruised or if the needle has gone in too deep, withdraw the needle from the other side of the part until it reaches the base of the thumb.
And you must understand this suture as if you were making leather, and that you leave a space once the swelling has gone down, and you take it up again from the other side until the suture is complete
The second way of stitching is as Galiens does it properly, which is to join the two parts naturally together, and to press one head of the swelling against the other head, in a similar manner
Burn an awl or thorn near the edge of the wound, and make the wound pierce only slightly, and leave the hair in place. Then withdraw the needle, and make it pierce from the back outwards until it reaches the center, leaving the hair in place
And make the wound pierce on both sides until it reaches the center, at two other awls that are on the other side
This is the usual method of suturing and the most common.
If anyone doubts this word, and no one testifies, we must suture the belly with two needles, or there is a thread in the gut
and must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who suture wounds
And the stitches that when the rotation is inward of the belly, if the stitching is greater than others on the belly.
The judge of the wound is like the judge of other wounds:
and when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even though it has moved, if you stop the bleeding and the swelling.
then put on absorbent powder around the wound, and if it has moved, do not put on any dressing that is present until the wound has healed; and close the wound, and keep the dressing firm, and the bandage tight then treat the wound like the others until it is healed.
If you have no medicine, put on a cloth, until it starts to bleed profusely, cotton wool, and move the limb twice as much as necessary until it is healed.
For in many situations where wounds are simple, you need no other medicine.
If you doubt that the wound will not heal, moisten the principal limb with warm oil of poppies or rosemary oil, and put on compresses; soak the wound and remove the discharge.</start_of_turn>
If there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and it happens often, if you mix vinegar and black wine together, and do the same if the putrefaction reaches the intestines.</start_of_turn
The spleen and the large intestines are easier to heal than the small intestines.</start_of_turn
The intestines which are called "jeuns" cannot heal when they are swollen, because of the swelling of the veins, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of their nature to nerves.
And if the thread breaks from the wound, if it is returned backwards as with the intestines, while it is fresh;
And if it is black and has become towards or black, if you must know that you must bind the black part, for there are veins and arteries there.</start_of_turn>
Then bind that which is between the shoulder and put the two heads pendulous from the part below the wound until the thread comes out to align the extraction when the thread breaks, and the wound will heal.</start_of_turn
because of the wound
When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if you can restore it in small pieces, because I have seen that one bone has been fractured or belly of a spear;
And it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became filled and turned into a fistula, and in this there was vomiting and flatulence.
I put it to cure as much as I could, and did not cease to undermine until it was healed, and the pus was drained.
And when I saw it healed, I doubted whether the patient did not have pain in his belly; and there was no longer any pain, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
And they say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be ligated carefully: taking forceps with great strength, and gather the edges of the wound, and when the forceps have grasped the opening, if you put two fingers on the lip, so that it bites its lip above
Then he grasps the head, and if it will not slip, put another support afterwards in that manner as before, until the wound is completely healed. He closes the wound.</start_of_turn>
If the head of the intestine is perforated and there is no further discomfort for the patient, and it can be tied up with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine itself, in part as before.</start_of_turn
Take the head of this gut thread that is coming out, and then tie to the head of this thread a thread of linen twisted, then pass the thread through the needle, and stitch the gut, and hold it in place.</start_of_turn
And this method of stitching is not fierce but according to the way of the vein and the hope.</start_of_turn
And if the wound is great and wide, even if it is in one of the greater intestines, if there is no swelling or contamination, it is only because of its delicacy.
or that it is a fistula, or that it is simply Wounds and abscesses, when they swell, if they are called universally "fistula", and even when they are closed and swollen.
The fistula is, in truth, a necessary hardening and whitening of the nodes, or there is no pain, and it is as limp as a goose feather.
never in clear water, and sometimes thick; never once, and sometimes rather;
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not sanitized, and there is pus, must be caused by one of the seven causes: namely, by the smallness of the blood or by pus; or for its malice; or because there is much hardness within, and on the lips, that they do not allow new hair to grow. or there is too much tension; or the limb is twisted, and the matter is of bad quality or the medicine is not good for the treatment or because corruption is like a pestilence or because the property in the area is late digestion and late recovery, and escapes by nature or there are veins or bones:
and I have already mentioned these causes, signs, and treatments in the division.
Or you must know that I shall tell you of the cure for fistula, which is made by an operation of the hands.
The wounds that fistula arise in all members are painful. for there are fistulas that arise from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the surface of the skin, or in the intestines, or the bladder, or in the ribs, or the scapula, or in any joint of the hands or feet. and if a part comes from the root of the limb and some remain.
And all these fistulas of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance.
and if there is no fistula that does not go beyond that I have said, and you have undertaken treatment, and you see it diminishing, if it is right, if the pain ceases;
And if a fistula occurs, as when a worm attempts to plunge into it, for the worm will bend inwards towards the curvature;
And if the fistula has holes, and you do not manage it well with your attempts, if the worm bites through one of the holes, for moisture is short from one hole to another, and it fills the cavity.
Then when its reason becomes evident to you, that there is bone or nerve involved, and the limb is bowed inward, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and the place or where he feels it
When you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or a vein, or other bones that I have mentioned, if the limb is placed as I have said, and the bones are firm and the corrupted flesh is removed from it.
And then the treatment must be complete when it is healed, and if the fistula is well formed from the right side, if you must break it, just do so; then put in ten soft compresses in medicine, and keep them until the medicine consumes the excess that is remaining at the bottom.
And then put in greasy ointments that are healing and safe until they are healed;
And if it is not healed by this, if the burn it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, if you must break it.</start_of_turn>
If the vein or nerve does not cause you grief or principal limbs, as we have said.</start_of_turn
And if the bone is discovered, and there is corruption and blackness, if the wound is such that the corruption is all bony, then treat with greasy ointments that are healing until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If he is not cured, and his bow is bowed as before, his limbs that you do not wish to leave until they are healed must remain fixed until they make.
if he groans and wishes as long as you are at the bottom, and breaks all the corruption, then restore the limb.</start_of_turn>
and if he is already cured, that is good.</start_of_turn> If not, fix his limbs until the corruption is completely gone, for you will not be able to do anything further.</start_of_turn if there is no other remedy except to leave it to its natural course.</start_of_turn
if there is a slight fracture and you want to treat it with tension, if you extract with an instrument that is appropriate for this, and if there is a major fracture, if you touch it too much, do not leave it untouched.</start_of_turn
And if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, then grasp tightly with hand and moisture and chalk, and deliver the bones.
And if you do not hold them off at once, if you put over the wound something that causes putrefaction, and leave as long as the lice are soft against the bones, then there will be less suffering of the bones in the end.
And if it is a great bone, such as an arm or thigh, if you remove the corruption as long as the marrow is completely bony, then restore the wound.
And if there is a great part of the corruption, and it comes up to the bone’s marrow; then grasp firmly and cover all up to the corruption, and then treat as long as it is soldered
And I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in my own leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
And I tell you of a young man who was about thirty years of age, who had pain in his leg caused by something within his body, until the matter came out through a large abscess; and there was no other cause known to open it
but he became mad with fever and sweat as much as the abscesses opened, and corrupted much matter, and became a fistula, and there came out much pus that all these things caused great suffering and moisture in the body
and he remained sick for two years, and there was no known art to heal him, until I saw him again, and I saw his leg and the medicines that were given to him, and what cured him was the pus that came out through the abscesses. And became red the skin of the young man, and had the color of citrine.
I bound a thread in one of these holes, and then encircled all the holes, and found that one followed the other throughout the limb.
And I grasped it then, and struck in one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and putrefied, and it emitted corruption until the corruption reached the innermost bone.
I saw that which appeared to me of corrupted bone, and I cared that there was no other corruption, except for that which I had seen;
and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but I could not close it
and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I treated it, and then I held it, and I doubted about closing the wound But I can do no more than I can grasp hold of the edge of a bone, and I will force it out completely, and then I will restore it with medicines. And he was healed and strengthened instantly, and did not want to renew the work for fear of the patient's weakness, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death which I avoided for him. For often there is the evacuation of blood, but he remained entirely well; and in place of the bone there grew a hard scale, and it was of good fortune and caused no hindrance or any adversity in any way, neither to the spirit nor to the body.
And if the bone is broken in no limb of the body, if you can bandage it in this manner: take hold of it, and strain it at the head of the bone that is open, and command that no one stretch it upwards; and put another layer of linen more thick than the first layer, and bind it over the part that is torn from the bone, and stretch the head, so that if you force out the corrupted flesh from below, you uncover the flesh above the limb where you are bandaging, so that the flesh does not bleed the flesh
And put I a sponge or a bowl of salt on the bone to cover the corrupted flesh.
And must cover so thoroughly as we can see and feel the corruption, and cover it once more.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if you uncover the flesh entirely;
then put I a sponge or a bowl of salt, and then cover from one part to the other the corruption, and be it from the edge of the corruption as far as I have said
and if the corruption is in the joint, if you join the corrupted joint, and cover the bone or what it contains on the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, if there is no other vein except to cover it.
If the limb is corrupted or swollen at the wrist or elbow, if the swelling is great, indeed inquire concerning that corruption, how it has appeared. And move it in every way that you wish, but that the vein or nerve does not hinder you
When the incisions are made and the tissues are closed over the bones, there are many things to consider, concerning the position of the bones and the appearance of swelling, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness Therefore it is necessary to consider the appearance of any imperfection in this work.
And the work will show you the instrument that you must have, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases If you think the instrument which you have grasped is sufficient, then hold it according to that which is commanded.
The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, or by pressure, or by force
and when you have treated the inflammation with medicine, it does not help; if you cover that limb until the inflammation subsides, or if the inflammation returns, for the patient escapes by this means or by the greater malice of the defect of the limb
and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if burnt by fire, and afterwards the blackness, for that inflammation of the limb spreads throughout the limb and takes hold of all the bones;
if you are in a hurry to cover it, and if it is from the bite of venomous creatures such as scorpions of the sea and vipers, and similar things, if the inflammation is at the root of the bone, if you touch it, and does not give you space to move your hand
And if it comes up to the hand, if the nail is at the joint, so that the cuticle does not reach the elbow;
and if it comes up to the forearm, if the nail is at the wrist, so that the cuticle does not reach the forearm.
and if it passes the wrist, that is death, and there is no remedy but the quantity of its virtue.
and all that you can do when the cuticle comes or is bent. if it comes to the first joint, if the nail follows the other joint;
and if it comes to the bone, if the nail goes through the whole bone. and if it comes to the leg, if the nail is at the knee joint
And if it comes from below the knee, if there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to die;
And if it comes from below the knee, if there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to die; then grasp the limb with one hand below and above, and with one hand support the ligament below and the other support the ligament above, and cut the flesh between the two bones at the width of a nail, until the bone is exposed.
Then grasp the limb with one hand below and above, and with one hand support the ligament below and the other support the ligament above, and cut the flesh between the two bones at the width of a nail, until the bone is exposed; then pull out the bone or cut through the flesh, and put some lint on the wound so that the dressing does not touch the sound tissue, and make the patient another wound and incision around the wound
And if blood flows when you work, if you cauterize the wound immediately, or put on some restraining powders;
Then return to your medicine as long as it is accompanied, and then bind the limb securely with a strong tie, and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you that I have seen at home in this very place:
there was a blackness that seemed to burn like fire, and that corrosion first appeared in the middle of the bone, so that it consumed the whole bone.
and when we saw the corrosion, if we covered the bone, and it healed;
and long after the corrosion had gone away, it returned to me, and I put upon it things that rebounded after the removal of the callous, and it did not cease the corrosion
therefore I cut off the limb, and I did not dare to hope to save the matter And I doubt also that if I cut off his hand, he will not die, for the strength of the man was feeble.
And he awoke completely, returned to his land, and took hold of his hand, and was healed
I have heard of nothing like this except in the case of necessity
Blood often comes out of the vein in the bone, and it stays for such a long time that it makes great swelling Then it returns and bursts, and in that jump there is a bursting of blood, and it stays in its place like vessels The skin which is under is also as thin as draped cloth, and does not reach the bone, nor the nerve, and such diseases are called “sane”, and are not called “fistula”.
But if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone in the marrow, it is called a fistula.
and the wound if it is that you can embrace that skin all around, and even when it is subtle, like a drape.</start_of_turn> and does not remain because of its corruption.</start_of_turn>
And if you have bound that the skin is split, and the corruption is not in the marrow, and the skin is thick like hair, so the surgeon must take care of the fistula.</start_of_turn
watch if the wound is great, and that the swelling is of foul odor, then apply Egyptian medicine which is made for this purpose.</start_of_turn Take ease, and oil, and lard, equally, and put them on the wound over the vessel in the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
Then take what you need according to your need, and make it hot and sweet with honey, and clench your chest, and restrain the opening. Leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it while squeezing out the excess.
Do this several times, until the wound is cleansed and the bone is strong again
Never wash with vinegar, when this medicine is not present. Take vinegar from the root of the vine, and pour water over it, then let it drain, and clench, until you are sure that the wound is well healed
And if the patient is unable to bear the pain, neither Egyptian medicine with its unguents, if he is immersed in a bath of water and honey or there is a little bit of clotted blood; or you bathe him in honey and wine, which has the property of softening and washing away, and the wine makes the blood thin.</start_of_turn>
When you have done this, and you are confident that the pain has subsided, if you bathe in what causes the swelling to rise, and you take a plaster bandage and make it with rose oil and wine.</start_of_turn
or you bathe in some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about the properties or treat with ointments.</start_of_turn>
And if the opening of the wound is too small, and the cautery needle cannot enter, if the space has been enlarged by the point of a spear, put in an attempt of Egyptian or balsamic ointment, as much as it has been enlarged.
And if the wound is too wide, if the nail and the cautery leave so much swelling, or the needle can enter, and if the opening is above the navel, if the hip bone or lower part of the limb is below it
And if you do not cover the wound below as you see, if it appears in such a way that the wound moves below where it is, for when the wound is deep, if it does not leave a scar, and if you do not cover the wound below as you see, if it appears in a bad way When the bow is correctly positioned below, and nothing of the bow is left out;
When the bow is correctly positioned below, and nothing of the bow is left out; and take consolidating medicines to bring about the healing, and cover with a linen cloth that covers the entire wound then put forces where the wound is greatest at first, because there is often a swelling on the other side of the drape as much as there is on the wound itself, and put it on the wound so that the bow is aligned, and do not remove the great drape until after the swelling has gone down once
and that which is outside the wound often helps to set the bow, and it is necessary to remove what is causing the bow to become loose, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digestion, or indigestion
And take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not; and when your medicine is complete and you see the nature that the swelling is above the wound, if the swelling has already receded, approach the patient cautiously.
Then loosen the dressing in the morning or evening; and when you loosen the wound, if there is another drape in place, and renew the dressing.
If subtle drops appear after a long tension, do not fear for your life, for health is approaching.
For there are some people who are late in their healing of wounds, and those who make the matter worse
and if the swelling in the belly remains after treatment for a long time, swelling that has not receded;
and if the swelling returns, and is prolonged, if you give moist medicines and dry in action, if like ointment diaphetic, because there is a great part of vitriol, and that is the last medicine;
Take oil of rue and roses, and vinegar in equal measure.
Then soften it and use it.
And this itself makes honeyed ointment that engulfs, when vinegar of dyafinit is not present, or you take alum and aloes and incense, and grind them, and sprinkle on honey when it comes out of the fire;
Then I apply it as a bandage, and extend it outside, and never administer an aristologist for a long time, and root of lilies celestial, which is as much like wheat and barley flour; And use simple or compound remedies. Grind them, and make powder, and sprinkle on honey that I mentioned above, and use it.</start_of_turn>
If the cure is prolonged, and has not healed from this treatment, then the abscess must be opened, for corruption has spread deep into the bone, or there is stiffness of the limb, or swelling. If the cure for the fistula, as we said before.
The swelling is an abscess that originates from the boil of the hand, or the heel, or by chance originates in other places;
and when it is inflamed, and we do not take care, if it comes to a boil, it bursts and brings forth pus until it bursts the root of the boil, and by chance it bursts all
and comes the corruption up to the bone, so that there is great pain, and the limb is large and dark in color
When you have cured it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, if you must, take away all the superfluous parts that are remaining from the swelling, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great aid when the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy.
and if the nail presses on the marrow and begins to prick, and the blood boils, if you do not quickly remove the splinter from the nail that has pricked the marrow, and pull it out completely, and cauterize the wound with mild and gentle heat, and apply some medicinal ointment to stop the bleeding. then treat the wound as long as it is healthy.</start_of_turn>
and if the bone is corrupted, if you cauterize and break, because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed.</start_of_turn>
and if you see the bone cracking, if you break it as it is before said, then treat it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If he is fierce, and foams at the mouth, and feels great pain, if it is suspected that the injury is serious, you must first stabilize him.
Then grasp the bone of the armpit tightly with a cut across below, and guard that the cut does not reach the cartilage that is under the bone, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if there is movement, put something above which will soothe it.
The two joints which arise in the hands of some men by chance are always fleshy, and in some there is bone, and never is there a nail, and never are any born in the root of the joint, or are they born in our hands from the two joints.
He who is born without need does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the bone, by chance moves;
The size of the bone that is fleshed is slight, in part only its size is at its root from a broad bone
He who is born at the root of the jointure if he is grieved must be cured. if he persists in tormenting you
He who is born or must afterwards in no wound, if you must, first cover the rounded fat until the bone, then grasp the bone to a suitable width like that, and then cure until it is healed whole
The wounds that come with childbirth, or with injury, or with fire, or with other things.</start_of_turn>
If it is possible to bear with this discomfort, if it must be healed according to their natural forms; then put between two bands or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that it does not stick; or you put between two pieces of soft lead, until it is well joined if it is possible.
When it comes to any of its two ends with the palm, if the wound closes so that it is sufficient.</start_of_turn>
These veins are large vessels covered with black mucus filled with sorrow, which comes to cause pain in many limbs
and more often cause those who travel on foot and work and carry burdens than others.
It is therefore necessary that you do not give any purgatives of colchicum, and then the rest of the balsam.
The cure of fire is as follows: two methods. One method is with the forceps, and one treats the black blood by burning it. The other method is to ligate the vein, and then burn it thoroughly.
The size is as these two methods allow The limb should be made hot with strong heat, until the great part without being split is soft, and then strain the limb of the patient from under the buttock down to the part below the knee
Then ligate the vein in one, two or three places, of a large size, and then burn from the head to the tail, as much as the patient can bear;
Then the leech is taken, and it is commanded that it should seize hold of flesh surrounding the black mole.
Then the evacuation and bleeding recommences when the veins are full, and harms the patient.
The nourishment of the limb is in this way: raises the limb of the patient, if there is any hair, then puts it in water or oil, and raises the limb of warm water until it turns red, and swells the veins;
and if you have no oil, if the limb is burnt by fire, then grasp the limb at the long bone at the shoulder or at the ankle;
then apply leather to the burn, and loosen the vein from below, until it appears when it is felt
And on the wound one sees red and black, and when it enters or leather seems just like a white thread.
Then one should stretch the wound, until it reaches the leather, and then pin it with a lesser weight, and then put a weight on it in another place in the third degree;
Then pull the leather over the wound until it appears, then tie it firmly, as you have done previously, and pin it with another weight as you did before
Then pin another weight, or several if you need them, and then tie it, and pin it at the root, and pull and tie until the second degree
Then pull out the weight degree by degree, until it is all gone, and then pin it
And if you do not handle and lift it, if there is a nail at the end of all its might, hold it fast and pull it out, and there will be blood, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is gone. Hold that it does not slip, for if it slips, it cannot be handled or lifted, and this brings harm to the patient.
When you have finished treating it, put out the limb from the wound with vinegar and rose oil And keep it until it is healed.
And if the limb is contracted and twisted and bound together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if you must force it open, but do not cover it up And thus it is with us that we have said before.
The shape of the fire from which we take hold of the bone is crooked, and does not tear me, except that it takes hold of the vein;
It is of great curvature, for if it were slight, it would tear the vein, but being thick as we have said, this is the shape
This vein is enclosed in the limb, in hot parts or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth or where there is no moisture;
And sometimes it happens elsewhere except in the limb, and this comes from the rotting that comes from the decay of the skin, as it comes from the inside of the serpent's body and outwards, enclosed between the skin and flesh
And if there is a sign of the beginning of this vein, that is, if there comes into the limb a very great swelling, then it chains the blood, and the vein begins to swell like a plant root.
When the arm is dislocated, if you wish to cover it, take a piece of sponge from one and a half fingers’ breadth to two and a half, and hold it, and leave the sponge on the limb; every time that it points downwards, if you cover the sponge and the thumb, hold them.
If it is too long, if in its course you cut off a part, and cover the remainder, do not cover it at its root until it is fully healed; for if you cover it, if it returns to the bone, it brings about inflammation and pus or swelling, and makes the disease worse.
Therefore it is necessary to treat it thoroughly and leave nothing or bone behind
And never has this vein escaped me when treated with five palms of length, or with ten; and once it escapes from ten palms of length, when you grasp it, if there is even a hair or a wound, and the blood flows until it stops.
And either empty the contents that are within, and bring medicines to the place; without causing any swelling, then cure as with abscesses.</start_of_turn>
And never has this vein been grasped by the hands, even when it bursts at the joint of the thumb or the little finger, and there comes blood from a wound; from which it leaps again.</start_of_turn
Cure in this way as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
And never has this vein hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow, or at the wrist, and there comes moisture from the rupture; cure it therefore as we have said before. This disease is called in our land "beef disease" because it often causes swelling of the buttocks, and is like a small wound between skin and bone, which rises throughout the body, upwards and downwards, and the patient feels it well in every limb, as long as it tears the skin or goes away, and leaps fiercely.</start_of_turn
And it is said that from any humor, when it comes and bites like serpents and worms and beetles or belly;
and there is doubt of its malice, for when it goes through the body and ascends to the head, and comes to the surface, by chance it returns and destroys the substance. and this often happens.
When you see it cured and treated, if one cannot drive it out until it goes away:
then you must certainly bind up the limb above and below with a strong and tight ligature, and then support above and support below, and when it is moved into the fire it will be consumed and will die
And the greatest harm that it makes is when it contaminates the oil, as we have said.
And if you see it coming or near the oil, immediately grasp its bristle and hold it above, and push it away forcefully
And you must use the patient for the application of external medicines to dissolve bad humors caused by bodily humors, and feed him nourishing foods rich in protein
When you see it cured and treated, if it will not go away, then do this: bind the limb above and below with a strong thread, then put a cautery on the surface and burn it until it dies; for the greatest harm that it does is when it runs counter to the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, strain from it the hair that grows on the edge, then put a cautery on, and burn it. And use the patient of purgatives of corrosive medicines for the bad humors that are carried, and give him nourishing food. This ailment is called in our land "Vakirir," and is a pain that comes in the joints, and which passes from one limb to another
I saw that which I told you. I was called to a sick woman, and saw her arm swollen, and discovered a small swelling in the belly of her arm;
And thus afterwards, the limb will rise up like a worm at the shoulder, more erect than anything else, like a living silver when it breaks from its root to another.
The pain departs from that root and rests in the shoulder, and then afterwards it is corrected throughout the limb, until it comes to the other arm
Then it was told to me that it twisted back towards the limb, as I saw it
I was amazed at how it twisted back inwards towards the body, for I had never seen such a disease in this way before.</start_of_turn> However, I would advise that if you wish to move the limb from one place to another, you must not cause pain in the limb, but I do not wish you to move it, as I have seen it in women
and I thought that it was because of that that the women had dry limbs, and their veins uncovered, and because of that appeared that constraint of that stiffness.
And they do not appear to me according to this reason to those who are fond of such things, and who have moist skin and veins filled with blood.
When you see this disease cured, and the patient feels this pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if the lymph below and above has become swollen, and then lies upon them as long as this constraint of the wind opposes; and burn the flesh
and if you do not see it at your eyes, if you cure it of that which evacuates the wind, as foul pills, and oily pills, and similar things
The towels are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the nature of the wound or the pain they relieve.
The diversity of them is such that some have large points, and small, and hairs, and pus; And those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those in which there are pieces.
And those which break in no limb break in two ways: or in the principal bone breaks, as with the skull, forearm, heel, shoulder blade, ribs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it breaks in no place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, will teach you: if you know that you must extract this shard, for death comes afterwards in various positions. and when this sign is not present, do not teach me, for the shard does not go deep, if you follow, and cure the wound.</start_of_turn>
And the sign of a fractured skull when a splinter pierces the bone, and leaps the blood that is above the skull, is when scraping and soiling and vomiting and nausea, and redness of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of senses, and vomiting of bile. and sometimes there is no wound, or no ear; or by chance it causes the speech and the voice to stammer and leaps from a white moist wound resembling a boil, and also like burnt barley.
and if this sign appears, if you hold back treatment, and withdraw the splinter if it has not penetrated
The sign of the splinter when it breaks or curves is that it is close to the left breast, and it feels as if it were stuck in something hard, without emptying; And by chance the eye turns just like the pouls, and in dark blood, and comes cold sweat and cold sweat, and fainting. The eyes then sense doubt that the death is coming.
And the sign of a wound that never heals is that there is no scab on the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and breathes heavily and sweats profusely.
And if the eye is struck in the corner of the eye, if it is taken out of the small bones. it spits greatly and suffers great pain and breath is suspended and all the limbs are moving around
If the arrow comes out or remains in the flesh, by chance there is no sign of indigestible meat in the wound.
If the arrow comes out or remains in the flesh, and there is no sign of feces in the intestine, if there is no hope of recovery, do not attempt to extract the arrow.
and if the eye is struck in the bladder, and it urinates in leaps and comes out running, and the patient feels great pain: The wound is mortal.
As for the other limb, if the face, the neck, the chest, the armpit, the groin, the buttock, the thigh, and the leg are affected, and the like, there are many possible causes. When the stone is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I have mentioned before.
And there is at home a woman who has a lash or mucus in the root of the eye: I grasped it, and by force from the other side I drew out the fat of the ear, and it was cured without harm.
And I pulled out a splinter from the fat of the ear, at the root of the hair, and the splinter was restored, and did not reach beyond the tip towards the head, and the splinter was as large as a Turkish bow, all in all it was a perfect cure for the ear
The pain was cured, and no bad effects followed
And I pulled out an arrow from the throat to the chin, and the arrow was Arabic in the ear
I soothed the barbs, and held it tight until I pulled it out, and the chin was cured
And I took out an arrow from his side, which was in the hip or belly, and I thought he was dying.
and when he had not passed three days, if he did not recover his health; I cut around the arrow, and I pulled it out, and I pulled out the swelling, and there was no further harm done.
And if I took out an arrow from his side or from his back, and the wound was deep, then;
I left the arrow in, and I did not constrain his natural inclinations, and I found no discomfort in any of his natural works.
And when another man had an arrow go into his face, and the wound was deep, then And so it often happens that great pain accompanies this.
and that of other things.
And to carry out an arrow at home of a prince the king, that it was stuck deeply among the bones, and was a weakening inclination to the lower part; and the arrow was completely withdrawn.</start_of_turn>
I was called to care after three days that it had been stuck.</start_of_turn If I find the wound very inflamed.
I attempted to remove it with all my strength, and I did not feel it.</start_of_turn and there was no other sensation except for pointing and pain in the lower ear.</start_of_turn>
I thought that it was the tip of the arrow. I put on the therapeutic plaster plaster of digestion, so that it would not swell.</start_of_turn And there appeared to me the wound of the arrow.
And there appeared to me the wound of the arrow. I held the hands above the wound, and closed the wound again, and held the patient firmly until the arrow was removed from his body;
And he told me. I put on the wound a corrosive salve with my hands, until it was complete, and held it, and I felt the head of the arrow which was coming out at the root
then I closed the wound with that corrosive salve until the tip of the arrow was visible to me
and it healed well in three months, and then it grew so wide that I put in stitches, and held one side and the other, and I could not bear it any longer
Therefore, I will persevere in subtle methods and contrivances of various instruments, until I have made the grasp truly firm, as is appropriate for this ailment, until I have finished this chapter and restored the wound.
And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I restored it therefore, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured
Or as you have said concerning the quality of the extraction of some clots, if you place your remedy on something that I do not know, for the books do not teach me everything;
but you know the masters compare well with great things, and with what is present and lacking, find nine works, and a new instrument, following the order of things that arise in this art
I say that the arrows do not emerge from members or are fictiously bound for that matter. or by liquid discharge or they enter, or by another way.
and that which comes forth for liquid or enters, is an arrow broken within flesh, and never comes out again
and if it does not come out now, let it stay as long as the flesh is swollen, and rejoice in its issue
and if it is bound in bone and cannot be extracted, if you leave it alone for a while, and move it every day.
then it will come out, and if it does not come out, if you prick through all the soft parts, as long as the flesh is swollen, and then take it out
And if the splinter is replaced in the bone so that it cannot be seen, if you have tried everything; And if you feel it, if the pain has no palpable cause;
And if you do not perceive it from the wound, and from the depth of the wound, and there is neither bone, nerve, nor vein, if the pain persists as long as the wound is great.
And if you see blood in the wound, if there is a swelling in the wound, if there is an object caught in the wound, or if the limb is fractured, do not pull out the arrow until you have broken or softened the swelling of the wound as much as possible.
Be cautious not to break the arrow, but grasp it more firmly.
And if you do not succeed at once, if the limb remains bent over, then grasp it firmly, for the extraction will bring relief.</start_of_turn> If blood continues to flow from the wound, follow what is said in this chapter about treatment;
And take care not to cut into the nerve or the vein, and put in place as you wish to remove the arrow, either forward or backward, or firmly or gently.
Put the patient in the position in which he was when the arrow went in, for this is the greatest help, and if you do not know how, follow what the signs tell you
The arrow that comes from another place, or if you see no wound, or the skin is swollen in that place if you see it or feel it.
Therefore, take hold of it until the nails can grasp, and then extract it If the arrow comes out now.
And if it is held in the bone, if you round your hand around it until it enters the bone, expand the bone, then draw it out.
And if it cannot be pulled out, if you leave it in, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out
And if it is from an arrow, it is, if the wound is great;
And if it is from an arrow, it is, if the wound is great; and if you see it administered immediately, if it is administered with a pointed instrument that grasps the tip of the arrow between the teeth of the instrument.
Then hold the wound firm, and if the arrow is grasped, hold the instrument pointed inwards so that the tip of the arrow is grasped by the teeth of the instrument.
And if the wound is surrounded, then you must take hold of all the surrounding flesh or the venom is there, if you believe so; then cure the wound as it seems right.
And if the arrow is torn or broken or in the belly or in the bladder or in the chest, and it is close, and you must cover over it, if you cover it.
Keep covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract the arrow, and then close the wound if necessary. And the treatment must be such that it is harmless.
The shape of the tweezers with which we treat the splinters is similar to the beak of an eel, and thus is the form:
And there are many ways to do it. great, moderate, or small, according to the amount of blood
The shape of the tip of the bone is like the quill of a bird, to push out the point of the wound, as in this form:
Of veins from which one has bled for a long time, there are some which have had or will have sixteen inches, that is to say: Two veins which are behind the ears, which are covered by hair and two arteries which are in the temples appearing; And if two veins are two cubits long, which are called "aspires, and the vein that is at the front of the eye; and the vein that is at the back of the eye. and the two strings that are either yellow or white. and the two veins that are under the chin, which are called "augeherich. and the two veins that are beside the tongue.
The common veins are those that are in the armpits of the arms:
one is the cephalic vein, and is on the left side of the chest, and they call it the great vein The hair is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalique and basilique; and they call it the people "belly of the head". The basilique if it is thick or dull is called "belly of the belly"; and they call it the people "belly of the belly", and is above the navel, and is the one from which one sees, which manifests openly on the pouch.
And the saving is the vein which is between the auriculaire and the anulaire, and if it has two veins;
and in the limb and the foot are three veins: one if it is thick the bulge of the pouch of the left costa, and the second is sophene which is at the ankle of the right costa et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei.
and the vein which is called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other limb; and in the other limb are three veins similar to these.
The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps as old purges and eliminates; and it causes emigration.
and the quality of the healthy person, as I have told you, is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the body or the veins are rough; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw, as long as the two veins which appear behind the ears rest in two loops depending on the head: when you have done this, and you feel the pulse from these veins, if it signifies an embolism
Then take the lancet, and hold it by the edge of the vein until it reaches the bone, then keep your hand over the upper part of the vein, and press and squeeze the skin and the vein well; two should pierce through, and make blood flow as much as you see;
Then strain and hold it tight, until it is healed;
And I have already said concerning the incision and the cautery or the first book.
The blood of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is like an ancient emigration, sode, and obtalmia accustomed, and at the root of the tears there are blisters.
And the quality of the patient if it is like I have said: And it is that the patient strains his neck, so that the two veins open wide. he feels a tingling sensation in his teeth, and then he groans loudly.
then he takes hold of the vein in his upper arm with his index finger, grasps the lancet, grasps the vein in his upper arm and holds it, just as you would with the two lower veins, and makes blood flow according to your need
then he releases the patient, and puts his hand on the vein for an hour, and then puts on a bandage and then he binds it and leaves it until it is healed
and as for the other things we have spoken of them in their place and their treatment and their extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The blood from the front vein is worth as much as that from the cephalic vein has ancient diseases of the face, has emigration, and redness.
and if the patient turns his head violently, as when the vein bursts open.</start_of_turn> then take the instrument which is called the "forceps", which has this shape:</start_of_turn
And put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see.</start_of_turn Then loosen the patient’s neck, and tie the vein until it is well healed and never do it with a wide flame.</start_of_turn>
However, it is not right for the flames to be too great; and the latter [hair] through, for the bones are near, and by chance break the flames when they are slight.
The blood of two veins that are two cubits long if they aid the abscess, and the swelling, and the redness, and the yellowing in the fat, and diseases of the face
and the quality of their blood is that if the patient strains his neck by turning from side to side, as before;
then the latter, and let the blood flow slowly, a long flame a wide base, because there is no fat and if the flame is slight, by chance it will break;
Then make the blood flow out freely, as much as you are able, and then hold it on a cloth, and bind it firmly.
The blood from the vein does not flow if it is clotted, and if it is forced out, and in diseases of the face, such as measles and redness that comes on the face, and even when it is old;
And if the patient is spitting blood, then strain his neck to your left hand, and take a piece of charcoal long, and put it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open very well indeed, and you must begin to correct it now
Do not go too quickly, and make the blood flow out according to your need, and then hold it for a night, because it is often restored by rest.
And this is the form of the fire: the blood of the two armpits assists in the expansion of the spleen, and in the beginning of mixing, and in the mouth of diseases, and in spitting, and in corrosiveness, and in herpes, and in stone-like things.
And the quality of the blood is that if the patient pulls out his collar with one hand and with the other, as we have said;
Or let the master be above the patient’s head, and the patient sit on one seat, then open the vein widely, and take blood steadily, or as much as is necessary
Then do the other part in the other vein, and remove the ligature, and tighten loosely the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle And let him leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
Of the blood of the livers. The blood of the veins of the arms above helps to clot in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and wounds of the arms, and toothache and pain.
And if you must make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said. Then open the eyelid, and look at two veins, one on the outer eyelid and the other on the inner, and know them by their darkness, and by the fact that there are small black veins running alongside them
Therefore close both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, if the larger one is at the corner of the eye, and both of the lower and upper veins as well, for this is a mean method
And of the blood of the veins the tongue. The blood of the lower veins flows after the blood of the cephalic vein, and this is at the widening of the throat, and it has diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth
And if the patient faces the sun with hands clasped before him, tongue lolling out, and looks at the ground beside each rib, there is a black vein.
Then one must grasp both [arms] firmly, and do not move them too much, for these are the arteries.
The common veins which we commonly grasp are healthy in two ways:
or if you prick at their root with a blunt lancet like olive oil, which is called "anesil". They are wide and slippery according to the size and distance of the veins. The flame of the fire cautery is known to be round, and is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the superficial veins filled with thick blood which contain much blood and disorder; And this is the form of the olive flame:
and is more pointed, and is for healthier veins, or there is citrine blood.
And this is the form of the olive flame: the blood of the basilisk, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments such as those that are in the throat, or the collar, or the teeth, or the belly.
And it is necessary for the patient to keep his body still and to stop the artery that is near If he bites the artery, and blood flows out, if the bleeding continues, if you have said so; You must not be hasty with the flame, but must keep it at a distance as if it were an animal.
And if the basilisk does not clearly appear, if you must grasp it, and bind another one instead Or you want no rain from it, or you keep in its place the vein filled with blood in the arm: it opens openly. and the head of the shoulder is dislocated, as we have said
and if you see the blood spurting, if you must indeed take hold of the limb, touch the limb until you see the pulse; then sign the head of the dislocation, and then join the limb, and keep the vein filled with blood open and beware that you do not damage the artery when you see the limb swollen, for that is the artery indeed.
And if you see it swell up like the urine of a child, and it is neither red nor pale, know that it is without an artery. Quickly then, put your hand over its length, and hold it steady, for many times it has happened to me so that the limb remains still and does not move the patient;
or until it has healed properly.
if it is not bleeding and you feel pain, and the medicine is not present, if the artery is opened, for the head of the shoulder is pulled out. stop the bleeding immediately.
and take a piece of sponge, put it on, and take one of them and place it well until the other side is reached
If he does not stain them, it is well. If not, if the physician does so as we have said, with powders that stain blood
and the stainings do not last long in various situations because of the little movement of the wound and the swelling.
The blood in the vein helps to heal it from the top downwards, and from the outside inwards, because it is composed of the fatty and bony parts, as we have said
and it is important that the nerve that is outside should not be too deeply bruised, and if it is too deep, it will tear the nerve, and it will swell and the wound will either be scarred or will not heal at all
And this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some homes due to its subtlety, it is certain that you must use an anesthetic instrument. And hold the nerve still at its root.</start_of_turn>
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, if the vein is long.
The blood of the cephalic vein assists, for it pulls blood towards the head, and helps the eyes.</start_of_turn
It is certain to make the patient feel better by pricking with the olive or myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, for it has neither nerve nor artery.</start_of_turn> However, it is necessary to inquire about the degree of pain beforehand, and grieve nothing if it is the first time, and we begin again; And by chance the swelling goes up to some homes, which cannot be forced out the first time, but it matters not.
The quality of the blood is according to your thoughts.</start_of_turn>
The first thing you must know about health is that blood must not be forced out except for the preservation of health and to repel diseases to come.
or be made in one of the three veins that are or should be seen to be well-formed; namely the cephalic, facial, and basilar veins; it must be done at the beginning of the prayer before fasting, and after meals when the signs of fullness appear
it must be done the first or third hour, after two or three hours or three hours.
The blood which is administered for diseases has no definite measure, but when need arises for urine or stool, in all hours and at all times.
and it is not permitted to give blood to children under twelve years of age, nor to women who are pregnant for more than four months up to seven times. Must not be given to those who have passed 60 years.</start_of_turn>
When anyone sees a bloodletting, in whatever way, if it is commanded to evacuate the intestines of a light fistula, if there is much mucus retained, so that the veins do not draw out the useful humors from the principal parts
and it is not right that he should be too fat with meat, or that he should be very drunk, as much as there may be force in him, or hydrops
And if he suffers from vomiting, pain in the belly, and swelling of the belly, and frequent urination, and sweating, and guarding, and lying in bed, and all his forces, either from the weapon or from the illness;
then conceal the humors, if they are not great, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you can find any good ones.
then give him a bath or a wash, if nothing else hinders, to conceal the blood, and keep him warm from the belly to the chest, as we have said before
and keep him away from work, from worry, from luxury, and from similar things.
keep him bound and quiet, and let the patient be higher than his companions, and massage his arms two or three times, then gently pull out the thread below moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, it will not be able to correct itself without
And then he wipes the limb with his hands, until the veins swell up, and one can feel them.
And then he wets the limb with a little oil, then puts his left hand on that vein below the limb a little above or below where he wants to make the incision, so that the vein does not burst and cause injury.
For there are veins that run like strings to the patient, and if they are filled with wind, so that when one puts on the flame and takes it away, it cannot open the vein, and thus is this the result of that And if he severs the vein, if the wound is too wide, because of this one must be warned about these things.
And if the vein bursts the first time, that is good; otherwise, if it bursts again later, a little more than before, if the swelling has not subsided.</start_of_turn>
And if the swelling has gone down, and the patient groans, if one leaves the arm hanging about for an hour or two, and does not bind it, it will burst again.</start_of_turn
do not enter or bathe, and then burst the blood again.</start_of_turn
and if the wound is small, or if it lacks a visible mark and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you saw, if you are confident in the wound itself with all your might.</start_of_turn
And the work of a physician must be with great care, even if the illness is acute. for often in such work, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb inflamed, do not immediately resume the bleeding, but apply a layer of oil over the wound, for it softens the flesh of blood, and hinders the pain in this limb that the oil covers
and also administer oil to the wound to staunch the flow of blood.
and this also causes a tingling and swelling of the limb when applied to the limb; if it is applied too thickly and comes away when too large
And if there comes a large boil, which happens many times, even when it is not seriously infected except for this time or the opening of the vein is small, if you are hasty, put on the sponge soaked in water and in silk a little cloth, and hold for an hour.
And do it afterwards when the blood has stopped flowing from the vein, and if it remains fixed after a few days no black or green discoloration, if that does not happen to me. And if you see, put on no other dressing or unguents made from beeswax, mastic, or the like.
And many times there comes a boil and the appearance of blood in the basilisk’s urine.
Put your hand on it, and if you feel the limb soft under the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance Listen then, do not put anything of what we have said upon the wound, for by chance in the court without an artery;
Listen then, do not put anything of what we have said upon the wound, for by chance in the court without an artery; but it makes it swell dry to harden the limb, then cure it with another cure, until it is healed.
And take out each piece of blood according to the amount of its virtue, and its color.</start_of_turn>
For if it is without color, if you leave it festering as long as it is red, and if you see it black, if you leave it festering as long as it is subtle. and if it is too thick, if you let it cool down.</start_of_turn>
And it is appropriate for the one who is plain and strong, and has the skill of extracting blood, to make the wound larger, and the flame wider.</start_of_turn>
And for the weakling, do the opposite, and bind it firmly so often, and must bind it firmly by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this method of bleeding saves the blood from decay and swelling, and is more effective than letting it drain for a long time.
And for the one who has a swollen limb due to the bleeding, bind soft bread soaked in pomegranate juice around it if he is pale, if he has three or four bleedings, and if he is of a pale complexion, mix before the bleeding soft bread soaked in fragrant oil of poppy seeds, or in beeswax with aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant oil
If he drinks at the blood, after the issue of mouth blood, it is to be believed that he will vomit bile, an odorous liquid, and use other things which we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the belly.
And if he sees that his arm has turned pale, and he feels well again another time, if it is possible by great bleeding, let it rest still and still, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
And whoever has seen his arm swollen after the first bleeding, and has strong swelling, if he remains thus for thirteen hours after the first bleeding, or after the twelfth hour.
And whoever has seen himself well on one side, if he must remain well for the second or third day.
For there is much blood in the limb that is already pale, and it causes fever. If it is necessary to handle a great quantity, and to widen the opening as much as necessary; Then you must provide all the necessary precautions, and place your hand over the wound when it is healthy, so that the blood does not flow in place of the flesh, and this often happens when the patient is negligent.
Do not attempt anything if you see the limb slip again, and do not open the wound a second time; the opening is closed, so press firmly on it If it is crooked, extend the limb as much as possible, because that is better;
But leave it until it heals a second time; Or you apply the point of the flame until the blood vessel that is frozen at the opening of the vein bursts, and place over it a little piece of cloth wet with water, and press lightly.
And if the vein has escaped, if you leave it alone and do not restrain me, until the swelling subsides.
And if necessary is to drain blood the second time, if the same in this limb or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is saved in place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And if the patient grasps his hand in warm water, until the flesh is red;
then bind it loosely, so that the vein opens well, and do not make it too wide or long;
and if it does not open, keep the hand in warm water until the blood has clotted sufficiently; then withdraw the hand from the water and leave the blood to drain naturally until enough has drained out
and if it is in this state, do not put the hand back in the warm water, for it will swell more in the water than it did before.
The blood of this vein is more precious than all the others, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The saliva from the thumb of the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
The saliva from the thumb of the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver. Strain the hand and hold it in hot water, until the belly is emptied if you see it. And if the side of the hand turns pale, and if you embrace it all the way round, if it does not grieve anything
and does not swell too much, for the nerves are all loosened from their sheath, and then reset the hand in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not touch it
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if you put oil and lint on the wound, it will help to hold it together, and put on a bandage.</start_of_turn
The blood in the left hand is worth to the disease of the mice, and do the same as I have said concerning the right side.</start_of_turn
The blood of the spleen is worth for all the diseases which are caused by the heat of the body, such as diseases of the marrow, retention of flowers, diseases of the rains, and of the cramps and old legs, and similar diseases.
and the quality of its saliva is that the patient should soak in hot water, and wipe over the belly until it is limp, and lie down under the joint of the thumb. And if the vein is at the ankle, and below the heel bone there comes out a torrent of blood.
pure or more copious rain, or at the ankle, that the limb is swollen.
If you see blood dripping from the heel bone, beware of the nerves that are loosened, and the limb will recover as if you were grasping it
or the fire is extinguished.
And if it does not recover, if you reset the limb in the water, and let the vein drain well.</start_of_turn>
If the patient must be treated again the second time, because the first treatment did not work, because the pus is salty.
Do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and do the same on the opposite side evenly.
The blood of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its blood is worth the pain of the groin, when it is for blood that is clotted.</start_of_turn>
If the blood is thick and the patient groans or sweats, and pulls the limb away from the ankle twice, because otherwise the vein will burst;
and if she opens, if he is sound in every way, as much as you can, and through and through. it is worth noting that you must hold her firmly, for her spirit is strong, and she is easily restored by hand alone.
it is worth noting that you must hold her firmly, for her spirit is strong, and she is easily restored by hand alone. and if you do not find her, if she is sound neither head nor tail, nor in the least towards the little toe, and you guard against the nerves;
then do as much to staunch the blood as you see, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it tightly she is now healed.
Wounds are made of horn, or spider’s silk, or hair
and the cautery is done in two ways: or by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting.
Or by cutting and drawing blood, or by cutting. And this bleeding which is done by cutting is in two ways: or it is at full heat, or by cutting.
or bleeding which is done by cutting and by extraction of blood if it is done in twelve weeks of summer, when one is all swollen at the head; and the other is at the collarbone and two others in two ribs of the collarbone; and the wound from the bleeding fills the mouth and the wound from the bleeding fills the space between the ribs And the sponge on the crupies. And the sponges cover the two arms And the sponges cover the two legs And the sponges cover the two ankles
And the sponge does not touch blood, for there are many veins that are scattered in the flesh, and because of this one must not make any bleeding from a vein; One must only apply it [the sponge] when it is necessary, not with fire or sensation of fire, in no disease that comes from congestion, until all the swelling has gone down
And if by necessity of a disease it is necessary to sponge, or for custom, if one administers it carelessly at the beginning or at the end, and over and over again, in every embrace;
For there are some who, when they are blown about by the wind, bear a heavy head.
and there are some who suffer swelling and redness in their face, and on their head, and at the collar, and they have swollen eyes.
and there are those who spit blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and swallow blood. and there are those who faint, and see stars and blood and mud and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is wet and moist, we command them to fast for two hours after dinner.</start_of_turn>
Blood from the wound helps to relieve the pain of the head … which comes from the eyes, and it is not possible for me to know anything other than that after the evacuation of all the fat
and this vomiting is in place of the blood of the head, and it is not possible for me to know anything other than that it is from those who are of a cold complexion in use, or who are consumptive, for this causes them great discomfort
And for this reason, I advise you to refrain from using it in cases where there are cold or chief fevers.
And if the patient is conscious, if he becomes dizzy, it is necessary to place the suction tube one place further down the throat due to the doubt of dizziness.
The winds of the head are in lieu of the blood of the chief and of the bile, and for this reason it is worth more for its stretching out of the spleen, and for the splitting of the channel of the marrow, and for all, and for distension;
I must advise you not to force it, for if it is held too tightly, it causes disgust or swelling of the belly or the chest or the head.
The winds cause two costels of the head if it is worth as much as the pains of the chief, and oblation and vomiting, and strangulation, and toothache, and it is in lieu of the blood of the bile
You must command the patient to grasp his hand to put it in place, so that he does not obstruct the artery or blood vessels nearby.
The windings of the nose are like the cause of oral disease, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. This is related to the health of the two lower teeth
The winds blow cold from the coast and cause disease that comes from heat and swelling.</start_of_turn
The windings of the tonsils are as much as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these three veins
Command the patient not to move too much, for the blood vessel is delicate, and knows that there are nerves and arteries nearby.
The swelling that is on the rump is like blood clots at the foundation, and there are diseases from this; you must make the swelling large and round, that it has mixed well together And by chance, if it were subtle, if it should break; And thus it makes great wounds.
The veins of the leg swell open widely, because they draw blood from all over the body, and cause the ancient pains of rain, and of worms, and of the bladder, and cause swelling of the flowers;
and are in the place of the two shoulders, and of the two knees, and all of them grow pale after a long time, and cause death in many cases
The method of placing the vein is that you must put it on empty first, and then temperately, and put it on immediately, and move it equally, and do not stop doing this until you see the limb red and swollen, and when the blood appears red;
Then be fierce, and reset the incisions, and take care in the arrangement of the limbs, for there are some who have twisted their thighs, and clear pores. if it is necessary to wound once only, and make large incisions, and a deep wound; and do so gently.
And if it is not large, if you can wound twice: the first time to make the opening of the blood less painful.</start_of_turn>
and if it is not very thick, if you can wound three times.</start_of_turn
and when our veins swell with blood once and twice, if we stop wounding only once.</start_of_turn> And if our veins burst with blood, if we should often renew them;
And if they are not immediately apparent, if they are fiercely inflamed, and if they are perceived to be clotted, it is prudent for those who have thick skin and brittle veins, and who have swollen pores, to administer purgatives of oil that are both aperitif and dissolving.</start_of_turn> If this is the case, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.</start_of_turn
And if in wine, with rosemary oil, or lily oil, or chamomile, or something similar.</start_of_turn>
And if the swelling is great and cold, if take oil of marigold, or balsam, or oil of ivy, and the like.</start_of_turn>
And if one has stubborn pain and large pores, one must not put oil on, but it is necessary to wash after the evacuation of rose water, or cold water, or black bile, or pumpkin seed water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
And he who has moisture in his mouth, if he rises easily, or from a surge of mint, and thyme, and similar things.
These who have large superabundances may rise from old wine, or water of hemlock, or decoction of ivy or chamomile, or other things of that kind.</start_of_turn
And it is not permitted for the physician to use the vacuum before the bath, neither during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
And do not sleep afterwards the venting, and must keep awake when it is necessary to vent and when it is vented.
And keep oneself from eating anything cold, and if it is too hot or inflamed; If it is possible that he grasp cold things, such as pomegranates and cucumbers and lettuce at ease, and similar things; And eat barley broth, and broth of barley, and soft meats
And eat barley broth, and broth of barley, and soft meats And he who has a cold complexion, let him take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine medium, which is between wheat and barley, and eat little, and eat barley broth and little oilseeds and herbs;
And when it is windy, if he must drink more than eat;
and must give to others homes no time a tickling or mustering before or after, for to comfort the principal limbs. or be silent about it, but I must tell you that only those who are hot drink it.
The winds that cause wounds are those that are put on the liver, and on the wrist, and under the heel, and on the belly and the buttock and the groin and the hip, for these members do not suffer wounds above the joints, and they do not make them except to draw blood from one member to another, as we do when we put them on the armpits when we do not want to bleed
to overcome the stiffness that is in the limb, as when we put winds on the belly and the buttock to soften the limb.
And the bone causes pain, when there is an operation or a stone, for the bone, by its attractive virtue, attracts the operation, or deserts the stone from its place.
And it makes swell when it is placed on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained wind, and these swellings are administered empty so as to suck up only; And never are they administered together with fire, and never completely filled with cold water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a manner we fill the swelling with hot water so that there are herbs covering it
The form of the compress administered with fire is thus:
And there are two palms and a half of barley, or cost the entrance between the mileu and I little hole, as to pierce an arrow, and be of marrow, if so that it does not grieve the patient when placing it on the limb
And in the middle put a twig of flax or iron, to hold a tampon in place, and let it be great or small according to the ailments and the extent of those who take it.
for the swellings of the limbs are different from intestines, and fats from bones.
And must be placed on the limb:
holding the tampon of cloth or linen, and put it between the thumb and the ventouse, so that it sticks to the end of the ventouse without burning the patient;
and put it on the limb, and must be put either on the wound that we have said, so that when it is seen, if it goes away, we will know that the ventouse is in the right place
And hold it firmly in line as before, and repeat often, if you are skillful.
And in the chest where it is administered for the disease of pleura, at all times, there is no swelling or perforation, and it is only administered when it is plain water, and is placed upon the limb only lightly.
This sentence is incomplete and does not provide any meaningful translation.
They are only administered in limbs or where we cannot put compresses because of their small size, such as the palms of the hands and the gums, and similar things and in the places where there is no hair, such as the nails or teeth, and other things of that kind.
and the quality of the patient is that when you find blisters that are soft and clear without any sign of puncture, if you take hold of them;
and put on them a nut in warm water, until they are familiar, and they have nothing in their bellies. and then be cleansed of vein and vacuum, and then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the bandage.
when they are full, and cheerful, if it is possible to put on a vacuum, put it on, for this is better afterwards
If not, if you lift the limb easily, and then with water, moist well, and then press it;
and if the limb is too red afterwards take off the bandage, and put on a cloth of linen in cold water, and put on until the bandage is loosened
And if it does not mend by itself, put upon a broken glass vial or scraps of glass, and similar things, until it is extended.
or you take half of a clove of garlic and leave it on the limb until it blisters; then it will stop bleeding now.</start_of_turn>
and if you have more pain, take other unguents.</start_of_turn>
And if the unguents do not help, rub the limb with fresh blood, or put in an awl as long as it does not go in, and then put it back on, and as soon as it feels blood, it will heal.</start_of_turn
And when you see that it is bleeding, put over it a little bit of aloe and a bit of burnt wool, or charcoal, if it will stop bleeding now.</start_of_turn
This marks the beginning of the book of broken bones. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and displacement.
Saichiez, dear son, that in this chapter the fools gather, who do not see in any of the ancient books, neither in any letter, anything like it.
and for this reason is it strange in our land, for I have never found anything like it before
I do not know anything about it, except by the science of the ancient books, or because I have studied so much that I have treated this science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life
I have described it in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have summarized at the end, and I have made it clear the shapes of the instruments that are brought in, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
It is necessary, therefore, that our words or prologue of this book should be an image of the truth and the chapters or lessons should place their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are proved right learn and master this noble art, and learn it from others.
I say that whenever a break or dislocation or twist or fracture occurs, if you must hasten the patient to safety, do not neglect the patient from either side, if nothing else hinders you, even if you are weak of limb or young or old. or if the patient is tense or too cold or too hot;
and eat cold dishes, such as cold broth, mustard and chamomile, and do not drink wine, do not eat greasy foods or eat too much meat, until you are certain that there is no break or fracture of the limb.
if the patient recovers somewhat at first, use the first remedy that you find useful.
And when the fractured bone begins to heal, if you must restore the patient, do not nourish the patient with meats that cause great swelling, or that have viscosity, such as wheat germ in water, and pork, and testicles, and spleen, and veins, and fish, and large wine, and similar things.</start_of_turn> For in part nourishment returns muscle and more quickly the fracture breaks.
Know that bones that are broken in pieces and decrepit do not mend well by themselves, neither by soldering according to their nature because of the drying up of the limbs, nor because they are too brittle, as in the bones of small children.
but there is no cure, rest on the broken bone and keep the great tension that is necessary to join the limb together, until it is firm as it was before and do not take away from it any of its substance, for because of this we must nourish it with great foods, as we have said
And know that fractures are of various kinds in many ways.</start_of_turn
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as with the size of a pen to write.
For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others by bending, as with the size of a pen to write. And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a whole small fissure.
And with some measure, there is its own engine and its own instrument in restoring, according to what comes to mind in its place.
and it is known that the breaking of the bone is because its substance is twisted, and opens well by driving out, and some by pressure of the hand;
When there is no swelling or touch, and the patient does not feel much pain, there is no fracture.
but it may well have swelling, or tear, or a small fracture. If it is not possible to move the limb by hand, but medicines come after, then hold it firmly now.
And the blood that comes from the fracture, and is in the joint, it must now be put back in its place equally, even as if it were alive.</start_of_turn>
and if there are afterpains that come, if you leave them without treatment, until the afterpain is calmed.</start_of_turn
then put it in its place gently and steadily, and the blood that restores it is less heavy than the restoring of those who have fragments.</start_of_turn
Then the stretching, as it should be after.
And if there are broken bones, if it extends from two parts, if it is hands or feet, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or at two strings, or at a string and your hand;
and put the limb in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the limb are relieved, if you maintain by all means the adjuncts to their places as much as possible, and keep that by your work there comes no further injury or pain to the patient
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well the hand if you think that it is not well:
If the swelling subsides beautifully, and does not irritate me too much, do not press so much as those who make it come by their work of incision and contraction of the limb; for we have seen many times.
And when the limb is fixed, if the patient is very painful that he does not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, neither turning nor doing anything else; Beware that the limb is well secured that he does not feel any pain at all. For when he feels no pain, if it is not fixed, and you can put it in a position where he feels no pain.
Beware that the limb is well secured that he does not feel any pain at all. For when he feels no pain, if it is not fixed, and you can put it in a position where he feels no pain. And keep him straight, so that there is no twisting when you restore it.
And the quality of a broken limb is as I have told you.
The limb is braced in various ways in small and large sizes and shapes.
For there are small limbs, such as bones and thumbs and the like. if it is possible to cover them with soft and subtle cloths. and those that are large, such as bones and legs:
if it is possible to cover them with a wide and strong cloth, because large wounds embrace the whole limb and restrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no slackness
then I will bind the limb lightly, three tours or four according to the limb, and I will restrain the hand one inch above the break, and I will loosen the break a little, so that the break moves a little
and soften the limb a little here and there, as much as you take a great part of the limb itself, then take hold of the limb once more, and turn the joint back into its socket.
then bring to the lower part of the fracture, and hold it moderately, not too strong or too weak, as we said earlier.</start_of_turn>
then put between the joints some strips of linen or bandages, so that they are all even, and then bind everything up above with a bandage, and then put on your splints well made, if there is no abscess or swelling.</start_of_turn>
And if there is swelling or abscess, put on something soothing to the abscess, which will stop the swelling, and leave it like that for a few days.</start_of_turn
Then strain upon your thumbs, and let them be half of a broad cane resting steadily, or of wire from which you make nails, or of round stones, and let them be in this fashion:
but it is necessary that the thumb that you place on the fracture be thicker and wider than the others.
and be as long as it is necessary for the part of little or great size; Then hold the bones as before, just as you did at the first hour, and then bind them with a thread following the breeze, as before on the brimstone. The closer the binding is, the less;
And make sure the thread is medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen
because if the thread is thick, like those fools who make their wounds with linen cord, it is a great error, for the ligature will not be even if it is too taut.
If the patient is nauseated by the nails after stripping in the flesh, if you put down nails of linen or coarse cloth, it will not stain.
When the wound is with the splinter, and the nerve is fractured, I will speak of the cure later on.
The wounds that it is not possible to restrain with the hands must be grasped from the toes of the limbs which break first. For when the limb is large, one must not force the bones into place before five or seven days or more, according to the severity of the wound that has escaped.
And thus the manner of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion.
And thus it is that you take flour that stays as by the walls of a mill, and mix it with egg yolks, and make this confection, not too fine nor too thick, and use it. And this is the common manner of plaster that restores fracture in various positions, and even for women and young children, for there is neither too much chalk nor too little.
Another manner of plaster that restores fracture and dislocation and torsion: take pitch, lard, alum, saffron, gum arabic and mugwort, in the amount of ten to twelve parts. resin and aloe, in the amount of five to six parts The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. And make powder of them, and mix it with the yolk of an egg; And if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it restores broken bones quickly, and is worth more than many homes.
Another method of plaster which is worth more than torsion: take mustard and vinegar, mix in the proportion of X to Z and mix with myrrh and aloes, in the proportion of seven to nine cayenne six to nine camphor ten to nine, and grind it well, and confit with water or the yolk of an egg, and administer it
Other methods of treating dislocations and fractured bones consist of relaxing the pain, removing the swelling, and using an external support. Take new linen, moisten it in oil and water, and put it on the limb.</start_of_turn>
These treatments do not restore me, but it is good to appease the after-burning heat, and properly relieve the pains.
Another method of reduction which restores fractured bones.</start_of_turn> Take dry fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, mix them together, and make a poultice.</start_of_turn
Another method of reducing dislocations is to restore the break of the bone and mitigate the remaining heat Take wormwood root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, henbane seeds, one part of rue.</start_of_turn
Grind them together, mix with wine, and if the limb is pale, mix with moist coriander water or wine.</start_of_turn>
Other methods of restoring the limb are more forceful than the first, when an abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take root of chamomile, and flaxseed, marshmallow, melilot, and gentian, and violets and chamomile flowers, of all an equal part. Grind them together, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Hippocrates in his book does not put anything on the broken limb to restore force except for some wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between soft and firm.</start_of_turn>
And it seems Galen says we must put something warm on the affected limb to restore it, such as mustard, aloe, incense and the like, as we have said.
Another method of treatment that is useful for wounds and pain: take mugwort and chopped onions, or fennel seeds, and chamomile, and mix them equally, and grind them, and make a poultice of it and apply it liberally
And then wash it away a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, and that the bones of the limb are not displaced If they do not loosen with hands for days. If pain comes to the limb, or swelling, sense rest or inflammation, if you hurry, loosen it and hold the bone in place now;
and take a lighter bandage, and a sponge of sea salt, and immerse in water, and elevate the limb, until the swelling ceases and the pain is relieved then leave the limb rest for an hour, and put on dry cloth, soaked in water or oil of rose, and bind with a bandage, until you are certain that the wound has healed.</start_of_turn>
and rest the inflamed limb, and relieve the pain, and then restart the bandage slowly, and a little displacement, and do not tighten too much.</start_of_turn And must be subtle so that it is harmless.
If you see that the abscess is swollen, red, painful, and inflamed throughout, and that it persists despite initial treatment, you must repeat the procedure as before.
And if no movement appears in the limb after what has been said, do not force it to be released until after three days or four, or five or seven; And in no case leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the bruise has disappeared, and approach the junction of the bone above
Therefore more restraint must be used than before, and the swelling must be increased, as I said before;
And if you see the limb become drier than usual, the swelling will not rise again; Then apply hot water every time you release it, and do this every third hour, and cut a little piece of lint every time.
By this work, therefore, cut off the nourishment of the limb, and stay away from these fools who make it worse, and restore the limb promptly.
It is bad, and if there is doubt and fear, I see nothing else but to leave it alone and treat it directly.
There are many ways to break bones, various figures, and the causes are diverse;
because there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the collar of bone all the way down to the syphus which is the socket of the bone, as in the case of a splinter or fistula; and for this reason this type of fracture is called a fracture of the bone
or the spear pierces the bone from below in a forward direction, and this type of fracture is called an absolute fracture
And it is the wound of these two large or small breaks.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or fracture or snap of a bone, or fracture of the bone above the joint, or other similar things.
And if there is a burst wound, which approaches the gut that is below the bone, or it is on the bone, and is this wound great or small.
And if the wound is sutured in the bone as finely as a thread, and the break is small, it is called a “capillary” break.
And if the wound is made by a pierce or by stone, or by a fragment of something similar, and causes the bone to protrude, and the limb is askew like the cauldron when it boils over If there is a piece of bone between the pieces
And this is more with children who have soft bones;
And there are many other ways of breaking bones that are described in small pieces like stars; And I shall speak of it in its place.
And we know of all kinds of fractures due to the separation above them, the tension at the edges, and the corrupt marrow that is above.
The blood vessels are recognized by this: when one discovers a bone, and wipes over it, if the black fracture is open
In the treatment of fracture, take care of the patient’s condition, and if you see no other mishap, like vomiting of bile, emission of urine, extension, and paleness, fever and swelling, and other similar things, if not, it is certain that the matter will not recover without doubt.
And if no sudden accident befalls thee, and thou hopeth for health, if so, commence the treatment.
And when the swelling comes first to thee, and it be in the armpit, if so, know that it is necessary to remove the bone from the quadrant above the muscle which thou dost touch.</start_of_turn>
And if it be in this state, if thou hast haste to remove the bone from the seventh quadrant above the bone, thereby that the bone of the armpit be corrupted, and comes the accident which we have said.</start_of_turn
And if a break of a bone comes right up to the cloth covering the brain, if you must make an incision there
and take hold of the patient's head and uncover the bone in every way you can, and on the figure of the wound more cruelly than you can, and if blood comes out from uncovering the bone, or from incisions, if you can, put on some cloth soaked in rose oil over the wound and rest the wound until the incisions are healed, and be sure to stop bleeding then begin to reduce the bone, and that is done in two ways:
One way if it is that you grasp the narrow tail end forward, and that is the form:
And then there is another tail that is larger than the first.
And the second way if it is that you have many different sized nails, some narrow and others wide, and be pointed, and be made of iron indeed.
And gently work, that you do not break the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, if you must pierce through, even though you administer nails with washers, do not make them go through the bone more than necessary, and must have under the head of the nail a margin or a circle, that does not allow the point to pass through the bone
And you must have several of them, so that bones do not come in place of the thickness of the bone, if you have washers for all tests
And this is the form of the three ways of cautery.
And the one who wishes to pierce around the bone is that you put one cautery on the bone and turn around twice until you know that the bone is pierced
Then put the other cautery elsewhere a little later, and do this all around; then cut the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you did before, and lightly, as we have said, until you have brought the bone to your hand, or to any instruments that you have like nails, pins or the like
And keep that you do not touch the brain or the jaw.
And when you have pierced the bone and treated, if it is possible, reset the fragment which is displaced from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be more tense and subtle than the other incisor
And if it lingers nothing of the small bones, no nails, if the bones are lightly struck by a foreign object. Then treat the wound with sutures and bandages as we have said
And the other method of work is like that of the Galenicians, which is more certain and the load is very strong, and that is its word It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, either the fracture that appears swollen, so that when you have uncovered that part, put on gloves and grasp the handle of this incisor lens, for this is its form.
Do not split it from one side, and is the part most affected by two coasts, if it is split towards the bone;
Then hold it with a small mallet above, so that you can easily compress the bone all around, and take care of the dressing that is below;
If the socket is loose with the bone, slightly move the bone because one must well position it firmly, and with fear.
And if the bone breaks but does not pierce the skin, cut the bone only slightly above; there are small pieces remaining. If you can repair the fracture, remove the sharp fragments with blunt instruments of various sizes, in order to close as many cavities as possible, according to the work and the appearance of the fracture.
If there are large fragments remaining, and after further bluntness, and it does not stop, continue to do so until it is well done.</start_of_turn>
Concerning other minor capillary ruptures and superficial breaks, it is necessary that you provide the cause in accordance with its location.
And this is something that is not easily understood by one who has not studied this art
And if the surface is discovered, it is necessary that you take a drape of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound Then take another drape doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first drape Leave the hair longer and even; do not pinch it at the root. Hold the eyes steady until they grow.
Leave the hair longer and even; do not pinch it at the root. Hold the eyes steady until the abscess is calmed, then remove it, and give medicines such as root of iris, alum, incense powder, and arnica, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
Make a powder of these things and apply it to the wound, and give more medicines that are bitter tasting.</start_of_turn>
Keep the wound clean and dry, do not let it become infected, do not let it swell up, for when it swells on the head of the brain, if it is pressed and twisted, it brings great harm to the patient.</start_of_turn
For when one places upon the face something biting, if it does not desist from below. Beware then, if no other misfortune befalls the patient, as we have said, if there is any doubt or suspicion.
When one puts upon the face something biting, if it does not desist from below, except for the medicine that has been placed upon it, so be it that one takes one part honey, three parts rose oil and one part beeswax, and put it upon the face. Then treat it in the manner of healing that is appropriate, as long as it is safe.
Never break the two parts of the nail together, or only one at a time, for these are two bones;
These bones are cartilaginous and do not break easily, except when forced to bend or twist, and then they are healed
If one of the two parts is broken, if you swallow your thumb or pulp of the index finger or push it into the palm, as long as it does not return to its natural position. Do it gently, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is on the upper part of the limb, and it cannot be reached from below, it is proper that you place it even with the head of a splint as wide as a thumb.
If the break is of two parts, if you do it again, and hurry to restore the first part if you are able to do so;
otherwise, after the seventh or tenth day, when the inflammation of the wound has subsided, then bind up the thumb tightly with linen thread if the break is on one side
Or you swallow the other side if the break is there.</start_of_turn> And let the tents be so large that they fill the holes where need be.
And they say no restorer shall move the bandages from the wound, and must die each one for himself. It seems to me that this is good, but it is fitting that they be soft in the making of eggshell and wheat flour Then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilages hardened
Never put goose feathers in place of the tents, and if there is too much cloth, roll it up tightly, hold the brim steady, and blow on the patient among them or do as you see fit
And if someone’s clothes come to the neck while you are working, if you put some butter or cotton soaked in rose oil, or some potage of alum.
If the abscess does not come out, if you touch it with your hand, put plaster on it with linen, wheat flour and incense powder, confirmed with eggshell, then put on light pressure, do not bind it too tightly
And if the fracture of the bone is small and it is broken into many pieces, if the extraction has suitable instruments for this, then close the wound, and treat the surrounding tissues with char, soldering, if like plasters and ointments suitable for this.
And if there is no displacement of the bone, if you cure the wound, and put on bandages, as long as it is healthy.</start_of_turn>
When the mandible is fractured without injury to the surrounding tissues, and the fracture is slight, and not deeply fractured, except for the teeth which must be loosened gently.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the upper part, to bite your thumb of the affected hand in the mouth of the patient.</start_of_turn And if the fracture is in the left mandible, if you hold your right thumb of the right hand, and hold the fracture slightly, and support it with the other hand forward, and make it even.</start_of_turn
And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced in .ij., if it is recommended that you administer extension of .ij. parts, as long as they are equal.
And if movement of the teeth arises, or looseness, if strained by a gold or silver or silk thread, then put on a broken jaw cerate and put on a double drape. And put on a great cushion of felt or a piece of leather equal in size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it on to the tooth that you put in, and command the patient to rest, and chew soft food.
And if you see that the figure changes, if it comes loose at the third joint, and then reset it in place again; and put on a plaster on, with powder of cloves with plenty of egg or breadcrumbs, after that you have oiled the cerate.
And put on the shoulder a soft lining, and if it is displaced again, let the patient know that it is not changing; leave it as long as it remains healthy. Often it is healed in three weeks.
And if a wound comes out, if it threatens what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, repair it so that no piece of the bone is left as bone; If the bone is slightly bent, it has coved things together with it
And if the wound is wide, if it has flared up as you need.
And when you have sutured all these pieces, and there is no more bleeding, if the wound is wide, and put on some covering materials that cover the wound, to absorb moisture, until it is healed
The force breaks many times before, over the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways:
Or it is broken and detached in two pieces, and there are fragments, and it is the most delicate to restore
Or there is fracture with wound.
Or if there is fracture with wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the limb that feels the force of the fracture; and the other extends the limb towards the part.
Then put the fracture in its place, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor swelling
and if you have to extend more, put around the patient’s limb a round ball of wax, or cloth, as large as you need; extend and hold the fracture steady, and strain the sphere in your hand, so that you put the fracture in its place as it should be.</start_of_turn>
And if you are unable to manage the head of the shoulder when it comes out of its place, because it will slip downwards, you must know that the patient lies groaning on his heel, and put the shoulder in its place, that is, the middle ear, and hold the minister in the lower part of the shoulder until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Then address the fracture to your shoulder, and if you find debris there, if you must, make an incision above.
then pull out the pieces slightly, and if the bone cannot be reunited by any means, if it is at one of the incisions you have made; but hold the forceps steady, for this instrument is used to prevent infection.
and appears like a spoon, and is not at all curved, and be as wide as it seems necessary, according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work;
and has two holes, as you see, and one is large and the other is small, as is the fracture of the wound you made when you treated the bone
And when you are certain of the depth of the wound, if the wound is small, or if you are uncertain of the depth, if necessary use a dressing and bandage, according to its quantity.
And if the wound has become infected, if there is moisture, let draping with oil of roses, and balsam, and wine, and put on it.</start_of_turn>
The hardening of the bone, when it has wounds and is in pain, is that you put on the bone the plaster of pounded powder and egg yolk, and put on soft stamps above, and put a sponge below the shoulder if you need it. Then take a very broad bandage of a palm width, then put on a double drape on the stamps, and plaster it on Then take a slender rod about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the head of the bandage remains in place; And place the cushion on the shoulder, and roll the bandage around the neck, and drain the sore assissle, and drain the painful assissle. And hold the shoulder steady, and when you see that the ligature holds the shoulder firmly, and you clearly understand that the cushion does not move from the bone socket, if you return the limb once, and when you release the restraint.</start_of_turn>
And make the patient turn on his back, and put as little pressure on the assissle as possible to raise the limb up.</start_of_turn If you align the forcele of the shoulder with the displacement of the scapula, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not release it until it is well mended, for up to twenty days.</start_of_turn
Then resume the displacement, if you see that it must be done, and hold it tight and leave it thus, until it is restored.
and it is restored in eight days, and in less time to anyone.
Then restart the dislocation, if you see that there is need for it, and hold and leave it alone until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about twenty-six days, and in less time than most men.
There is no other way for the shoulder to break or widen than by touch
if the limb appears according to the figure of the fracture, and it is reset according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can
then put out the limb powder with mill with abundance of egg, and bandage it lightly, and put on a double drape; then put on a broad and soft splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is crooked in any part of the shoulder, if you use that braid of linen, so that the splint rests evenly
And then the stretch with a great firm bend, so that the limb does not move from its place, and look at the mark of each joint.
And every time that it moves, if the stretch is held, and makes the limb equal to its place if it is forced from its place, and lies the patient on his chest
and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
When these numbers are completed, if the dislocation has been reduced, and the limb is painless, because it is not a bone that is easily displaced
And if a piece of the bone sticks forward, and does not yield at all, if it remains in place, and the bone, do as we have said concerning the breaking of the forcele to appease the abscess.
And if a piece of the bone sticks forward, and does not yield at all, if it remains in place, and the bone, do as we have said concerning the breaking of the forcele to appease the abscess.
The weight is never broken in the middle, but this often happens; but it often breaks outwards.
When it is broken in two, if it declines with pain, and feels great pain, and is pale, and vomiting blood, and the jaw is split open in the broken bone, and one feels very well.
And if the patient lies down and rests his back, put a cushion between the scapulae, then press the scapulae and unite the costae of the second ribs with your hands, and slightly force them into place until the bone is set as it should be.
Then put on bandages and support the area under the ribcage, or with another soft cushion, and cover with a bandage, and bind it to the fractured bone, so that it does not move. And turn the limb round at the back, and hold it steadily, and wait a whole hour before releasing it, and if it has healed, keep the strain on it
or if it comes loose, by corrosion or by swelling that comes from within, or pain or abscess, if you hurry and take it out, scrape the wound and address the cause of the cure.
Then maintain the displacement, and hold it steady until it is healed.
And if the patient lies still on his back, put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades and unite the edges of the ribs with your hands, and subtly make them even in all positions until the limb is restored to its normal shape; then put on splints and bandage with fine salt or other soft material, and cover with a cloth, and bind firmly over the broken bone, if it does not move; and turn the limb around the back and strain it gently, and award some time the limb, and if it relaxes, strain it again; and if it comes loose again, because of corrosion or inflammation that comes from the bone, or pain or swelling, if you are hasty, loosen it and remove the splint, and address the cause of the fracture; then restore the splint and strain it until it is healed.
When the bones break through the skin, it does not come forth but at the greatest distance from the back, and at the head downwards, and it does not bend forth except because they are greasy; and the scent of it is well known at the inquiry as two should do.
The restoration is that you must put the fracture back in its place as it should be And then put on a bandage, and bind it with a staple, if you have need of it
And if the bones break through the skin is declining downwards, if the patient feels great pain, and points, like from the pleura, because the bone points the cloth and vomiting profusely, great quantity of blood, which is a grief of health, and the ancient ones have put great care into it
And if these things are said, it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push out the fracture outwards.</start_of_turn>
We do not do this, except in the case of ulcers that do not heal, when they have not appeared. And if they have appeared, if they are healthy.</start_of_turn>
And they say that no one has ever placed a bandage outside the limb to relieve pain, because it is similar to the reason Whatever, doubt arises that the vacuum does not suck up the superabundances at the root by the arrangement of weakness.
And they say that no one should cover the limb with coarse cloth soaked in oil, but put on bandages between the ribs to keep the wound even, then either cure with a pleurisin dressing, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points the loin, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is necessary to cut on the root of the fractured rib, and it is necessary to put in the instruments to stay the inflammation.
Then one must cut the bone further, and treat more gently, and then stitch together the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with sponges, until it is healed
And if pus comes out, if put on moist cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the limb;
and cure until the limb is healed from the opening of the wound, and be careful above the rib or it must be, until it is healed.
and also at the spine of the back.
When this is finished and you know if it is healed or not, if you see his hands softened and limp and dead, and that you cannot move or extend them, and if you prick them with a needle, if there is no sensation there
The wound is mortal in many situations, and if you move them and feel well when you strain and prick them, the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient is cured, if you put on cure.
And if anything like this comes to the spine of the back, and you see well whether there is blood or not, if you take care that the pieces are softened, and that the accident which is in the hands and on the back is open with violence and vomiting at will
and when it has been softened on the belly, if you vomit violently at will.</start_of_turn> And when he is lying on his back and sees the ass, if he cannot. These wounds are mortal.</start_of_turn> if you do not work diligently on their cure.</start_of_turn
And if this accident does not happen, if the thing is lighter.
And the cure is that if there is abscess of the caul, if you put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is calmed down.</start_of_turn
Then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a thread, and instruct the patient to rest. and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, even if he is well.</start_of_turn>
And if the bones break, if you can cover on the wound.</start_of_turn then break the bone, then assemble the two limbs of the wound, if it is large, with a staple, and then cure with ointment that will stick to the wound, while he is well.</start_of_turn
and if the head of the shoulder is broken, which is called the “fracture of the shoulder”, if you see your pouch of your left hand hanging down, and put it equal to the other hand at your side, then put on the plaster and the bandage if you need to.</start_of_turn
Then the strain, and if there be loose bones, hold fast, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healed.
and the fracture of the thigh bone.
When the thigh bone is fractured, and if there is swelling, do not have fear of that, for there must be some degree of pain at the head; and remain long, and bend downwards, and comes to the patient pain in the limb, and swelling, and bursting that which breaks
And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the fracture; and the cloth which is the fracture and the figure of the limb.
and if the fracture is only at the head, put it straight so that it is in its natural position
If the fracture is long or downward, make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of the fracture is complete.</start_of_turn> And when you have set them even, if you put on a bandage, then put on a staple of wool or thread, and hold the dressing, so that it does not move.
and keep the limb relaxed, as long as the bandage is even. And instruct the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back.
And if there is swelling nearby, do not touch it, until the swelling has subsided, and put on what we have mentioned before then return to the restoration, and hold it steady if it is appropriate, if there is no further accident
De la brisure de l’ajutoire.
The adjuncts are those between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored in one of two ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:
When one has taken one fist full of my groin, thus: take two fingers and put them in the top, and place the patient above one seat.
Then grasp the limb with your arms beside the fist, until it reaches the elbow, and has in the middle a fist-sized bulge, then place it on no heavy thing or the assistant should extend it backwards
Then put the palm of your hand together, as much as the hand can reach each other, until the bulge returns as it should
And the other method is if you support the patient on his shoulder, and bind the arm to his collar, and order the attendants that one holds what is above the dislocation at his hands, and the other holds the shoulder bones apart, and stretch the skin outwards.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, if you strain I lift the spleen, on the spleen, and extend thumbs of the ministers at his side
If the bulge is close to the head of the shoulder, if you must put one half of the fist below the elbow and the other towards the shoulder, below the bulge
And if the fracture is toward the shoulder, if you can put it in place easily, cautiously, as long as the fracture is even on the shoulder and on the bone.
Then set the fracture firmly if possible, and hold it in place, for if it moves again, the bruise will not heal.</start_of_turn>
And if there is a bruise, if it does not move, hold it still for seven days, and put on soft linen and rose oil, until the bruise is healed.</start_of_turn
Then hold it still, and the way to hold it if you place the support on the fracture, then assemble the limb on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.</start_of_turn
Leave the drapeil on, and hold the shoulder steady, and on the arms, so that the arms are in their natural position, without any hindrance, or if the bones are not moved.
And if you doubt that the bones are not moving, if you put on stakes, put on a larger and stronger stake at the fracture, and put between the stakes a space equal to two thumbs, and make the stake as thick as it passes through three thumbs
Then hold on to the stakes as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less loosely
And if you see the displacement of the stakes and the tightening, as we have said, while you restore the limb fractured, and you doubt the fracture, if you leave it to join up by itself until seven days, as we have said.
Then look at the third day again, that the swelling does not progress, neither does the pain subside, or that the swelling does not go up the limb because it is too tight. If the swelling persists, as we have said.
And if no such thing happens, if only after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back and has his hands on his stomach.
then put the limb in a cushion made of equal wool, and look for an hour or two, whether the limb is stiff or the ligaments are softened
if the disease proceeds by the virtue of medicine, and you do the meat that we have in front of us, in part as much as the meat is at the first moment; and when it begins to recover, let it be greatly.</start_of_turn>
And it is customary that the shoulder and limb should be taken back in XL days of every month. and then one must loosen them and administer baths and medicines of ointment to the limb concerned
And if the dislocation is painful and embolded, it must be loosened in two days or two months.
... of the breaking of the arm.
The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "femur" and the "humerus," of which one is small and the other which supports the pouch
and the other is large, and is the socket, towards the small head
By chance the large bone of the shoulder is fractured only, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
When the small bone is fractured, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
And when the great bone is fractured, if the healing is poor, it is more painful than when it is fractured whole.
When only the little bone is fractured, if the limb is slightly extended, and set equal
And if it is the great bone, if the cure must be forced, it is stronger to break it whole
And hold the pouch of the hand higher than the other, and place the little finger lower than the others, and let the patient cross over his hand himself, and put your hand in front of him higher than the patient, so that the patient does not feel any pain
Then extend the forearm towards the outer side of his hand, or at the elbow, and another assistant at the other elbow below
Then he puts the eye steady, according to its best form.
If it breaks into pieces, if you put some back into its place, and if there is none that prick at its root as before, you will not be able to restore it to its place, even if you leave it alone like we have said before.
And if there is pain in the wound, as I have already mentioned in this chapter If you take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of restoration blood spurts out behind the incisions, if I drape it with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, neither too thick nor too thin; and I drape it lightly above, until the blood spurting from the incisions is calmed.</start_of_turn>
Then I place the cerate and put the dressing of fine powder with a lot of eggs, because I put in the stars, and let the star of the iris be more strong and a little wider than the others.</start_of_turn
and the stitches that must be in six stars or arms in various positions.</start_of_turn> whether the iris is in one of the bones or in two.</start_of_turn
and is more strained above the armpit than elsewhere, and all the days less in aligning, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. and let the cloths that are above the armpit be soft and moist, and not hard or rough.
and let the cloths that are above the armpit be soft and moist, and not hard or rough. and the thread which is strained should be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said
Et renaisse le membre et le lien après quelques jours. And if any evil accident happens to the limb, if there is itching which happens to the limb, you must raise the limb with warm water, until the itching is calmed;
and let the limb not be left still
And start the movement again, and if the tendon is softened and the bone is loosened, and similar things, if the patient endures it.
If you take care that the swelling does not return to the limb, because it is too tight, then you must soften it, indeed, and leave it alone for a while, until the swelling goes down, and then restrain it.</start_of_turn>
And if none of these things that we have said do not come to the patient, if not until day XX.
or else put the hands to his collar, and let the collars be equal, and take care of movement and contamination, and sleep on his back
and the stitches that this fracture has healed in XXX days or in XXXV, and sometimes in XX days, according to the composition and complexity of the virtues.
Of the breaking of the hand
From the breaking of the hand
And when the hand is broken or dislocated, if you must know that the patient walks crookedly, and stands directly before him equally.
then put his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the minister the broken bones, and put them equal to the eyes, until they are well joined
and put the plaster and the bandage, if they do not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the liquid; and be wrapped in a linen bandage.
And if the fracture is at the end towards the belly of the limb, if you make a ball of cloth, and command the patient to hold it against his broken limb Then the stretching of a long hair, and let the staple of the beard be as great as the palm of the hand; and hold, if it be necessary.
And if the break is at the wrist, if you must know, put a splint above and one below in the palm, so that the thumb is over and straight, then bind it all around the wrist, and seal the loop between the two.
And if it breaks out to neither of us from the two, if it is the pouch, if you put it even, if it be necessary. And the stretching with the palm, and if you see that you must put a right little staple to lift the break, and it does not move
And if the break is as the other two, if like in the index or one of the others, if you put it even, and bind it with the good side which is after Or you bind them together holding, that the muscle is worth, or you put on a staple, as if it were a pouch
Leave the hair long and even, and if you prick them at their root, fix your eyes so they do not move until they grow.
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward.
When it is restored, it is held in place by the ligament beneath the fracture, and another one from above The patient lies on his face, and extends his limbs so that his limbs rest equally on both sides
When the fracture is in the bone.
If the fracture is close to the root of the thigh bone, if either of the ligaments around the knee joint is ruptured, and the other is stretched by the fracture.
And in the same way if it is close to the knee, then either the ligament of the knee must be cut, or the lower extension must be made
Then put the eye back into the socket with both hands, until it is according to its natural figure; and then put in the patch, and hold it, so that it does not come out.
And if there is pain in the eye, if you leave it quiet, return to your work and your treatment. It is made in a partial manner.
It is necessary that you wrap around the wound with a bandage two or three fingers wide, and keep the surplus taut, then draw up the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail, and put in a thread long between the bone and the limb, above the joint, and under the head; and keep the thread taut.
Then draw up on the limb and on the bone the bandage, and put on the outer bandage, and put a bandage on the bone of the limb
Then use the eighth finger between the leg and the hip of coarse hair to make them even, and start to tie three or four threads over the bristle; And the more you go up the bristle, and the less you strain;
Then take two threads of the kind you have between the leg and the hip, and tie three knots that are beneath, and then release the thread from the grasp of the thumb as long as you see the thread going down;
And the strain, if it does not move from its place, then leave it alone, and do not cause any swelling or any other sign. And if there is swelling, if the dislocation has been addressed, and if it is necessary to do so as we have said many times before
If there are pieces of bone that are pricked, if you can cover them, do not attempt it. If you cannot cover them, if you must, cut open the limb and drain the pus.</start_of_turn> Treat it as we have said, so that it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And never break the limb while these bones are set, as in the shoulder and arm.</start_of_turn
However, in the restoration of the limb when it is done, do not mislead the patient.</start_of_turn>
And so, if the bone is reset in one day, or less or more, according to the diversity of temperaments.</start_of_turn>
Hair that is in the groin has often burst, but it falls many times.
If it breaks, if not a mere split or opening, and if there is pain, wound or sensation of pain, this is very well indeed.
And the restoration is that which brings together what is rounded to its sides, as long as it is put together firmly.</start_of_turn
Then place the support, and I put a round peg, if you are in need of it, and tighten it as it should be, then restore all the arrangements that we have said before, if as an abscess cautery and other similar things. If you put a check on every accident that may occur, as long as it is healthy.
And if the restoration is done, if you put everything round back in its place, as long as it is put together firmly, put the bandage on, and put on a round cushion, if you have need of it, and strain it as it should be strained; then reward all the instructions that we have said before, as in incision and other things; if you put into each accident what it should be put in, as long as it is sound. And finish the fracture of the limb.
As for the bones in the limb, there are two, of which one is called the "muscle" and the other is called the "fleshy bone".
And there is often a fracture in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is as for a broken arm equally, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, if the limb is twisted from all sides
And if a bone is fractured in two, the limb is twisted from the front.</start_of_turn>
And if a large bone is fractured, if one feels great pain, and it is well seen; and it breaks out loud.
Then bring extension, and set it even, and bind the edges evenly.
but in this case, if the fracture is severe, and there are many pieces, that the extension is less severe and lighter and let it be as you are skilled.
When you have completed your work, if you take two strips of cloth about the length of the limb from the groin to the foot, and bind the limb from the groin to the foot on one side and the other side, from the knee to the foot;
then wrap around two layers of bandage below and above, and bind it firmly in the middle, so that the limb does not deviate to the right or left, and that is good
And no one administers me elsewhere for a long time on the limb, and it is of no avail, and one sets on the limb to prevent movement, and it is done quickly in the case of fracture or wound.
and every time one moves the limb, to see if there is any other fracture or accident. if the wound is complete, that is to say sane.</start_of_turn>
Of bone fractures which are painful.
At the ankle there is no fracture, but in the bones of the limb there is no fracture at all, and two must suffice; and there is no other reason except for fear of death.
And if there is a break in the bone, and you see these bones crowding each other, if you put the limb so that it touches the ground as if it were falling, and then put your limb back in place, where the bones were raised, and press until they return to their place.</start_of_turn>
then put the dressing and stamp on, and put some gauze on the limb a little above two inches wide, and press the limb steadily, and that you have wrapped the limb with cloth and other things as needed.</start_of_turn
And when two or three days have passed, if you loosen the dressing, because you will find the bones equal, whether they are fractured or displaced.
And if there are two breaks, if you restore them, as we have said, you must have two hands. Then put at each break a staple according to the length of the two, and be it a little wider; then put the pieces together as I have said, and strain evenly
And if there are two or three, or more, breaks, break each one; then put on each break a staple according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, and strain the pieces together. And be firm on the head of the bone against the belly of the piece, so that it will hold well.
Remember that there are other things that I have said about other breaks, as we have said before And treat each accident as it comes.
of the fracture of the thumb bone.</start_of_turn>
When the bones of the female have been broken, if you make her sit with her back arched, and support her behind;
then fill the belly with the nature of the patient's discomfort, and put as much in as I stop;
then loosen the woman, and hold her back and forth, and then pull out the cotton, until it comes out of the nature, and bring back the bones with the stop;
and when she has urinated, if the bone is pulled out by the cotton, and when she has urinated, she will recover, and do this for seven days or until it heals if it is restored the fracture, and if you see it, take a bladder of Berber, and bind it to the part with a bandage, and put all the bladder in the nature; Then blow into the cannula until the bladder is evacuated completely. When the nature returns, the bursting will be finished
Then fill it with cotton and leave it untouched for a while, until it is healed.
When the bone of the arm or the woman breaks, if you restore it as we have said concerning the thigh bone;
and are not hidden from those who study and use it, and understand my book
For the bursting signifies in many ways the right way to restore: therefore take it.
When the limb is broken, take a gooseberry and put it on the limb; Then cover the wound with a bandage, and leave it for three days or until it has healed. And it will be perfectly healed.
From the break with wound.
It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, as if it were the bone of the thigh or the shoulder or similar, that it be set now, as the pain that we have mentioned testifies.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound is well healed, if there is only a stain of vitriol, if you have nothing else, then resume the fracture in this way, or in that way, as soon as possible, for if there is no further displacement, the fracture will heal on its own.</start_of_turn
And if there is displacement of the bone, if you leave the fracture undisturbed until the swelling subsides, as long as the displacement is not too great, and do not touch the bone or the surrounding tissue, for you will risk causing further damage.
And if the bone breaks are apparent on the surface like a discovered wound, then you must know that you must press them lightly with your hands, with a small extension.
If swelling does not appear to you to put your hands even, if the ravine has this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and its breadth is in accordance with the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary at the root that it grasp three or four inches, according to what is necessary in the wound cure for breakage;
and be round and somewhat large, so that it does not press too much on the limb at your work, and be before and behind, and large from the middle forward, thus:
It is called "palainche", because it must be placed over the visible head of the bone. And once again, when it returns, let them be equal, one meeting the other. And if the fracture is slight and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, if you must copy the head of the bone as long as the instruments have possession of it
And if you cannot restore the bone, as we have said, if you see the handle of a usable instrument at this point, or to cut or scrape, to your power;
Then pull out what is stuck in the bone with rough scraping and little grease.
And when the bone is set back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, it is likely that the marrow is not in its natural position.
If you do this as long as it remains in its place, then moisten it with black wine vinegar, and do so diligently; and do not put anything on the wound except butter or anything else that may cause putrefaction and corruption;
Then administer stars when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover the dressing all around, according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with the breaking
And often have they done this thing to fools, and have made the patient mad, or caused his death, or corroded him never. Or let them be softer and more flexible than the other breaks.
And if the wound is small or great, and you doubt that there is bad blood flowing, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if it does not suffice to put on stakes; then cover the wound with a thick cloth instead of stakes, and bind tightly.</start_of_turn>
When you see after one or two days that the wound is swelling, if the bone that you put on top has remained there for a long time, and if you put on healing dressings, like with tetracycline and similar things.
And it is necessary that you bind the limb three times a day, in the morning and evening, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limb be immobilized in part as much as is possible so that it does not bend excessively easily.</start_of_turn>
And if the limb persists in its displacement, and it cannot be reduced but returns to its place spontaneously, with small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you reduce the wound with care, and pull out all these broken pieces that cause this pain.</start_of_turn
If a fistula arises in the body, or any other kind of corruption, if you must cure it, according to what is written in this chapter above.
And when a bone is broken, and is opened on the limb, as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar bones of the great limbs, if you do not treat it, for often death comes from this, but leave it until it has healed.</start_of_turn
By chance, after twenty days or thirty, the wound will have healed; then cure the wound if you wish.
and if you do not wish, leave it as it is.</start_of_turn>
We often come after the safety of the armpit, even near the joint, and it is useful to see the position of the limb.</start_of_turn and by chance we cannot make the limb move naturally.</start_of_turn
Beware then if we are fresh.</start_of_turn if he has administered astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and ochre, acaice, and similar things, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with a stiptic wine or with abundant egg or with oil.</start_of_turn And put it on the knot firmly, and strain it well, and do not release it from the hands until it stays.
And put it on the knot firmly, and strain it well, and do not release it from the hands until it stays. Then dislocate it again, and do it once more, until the dislocation is firm
or you hold it with a well-made splint because the owner of the splint is when it stiffens all the swellings under the limb.
and when the dislocation has become firm just like stone, and it is necessary to support it, if the swelling above has gone down, and to make the swelling apparent or do not touch it at all, until it is firm, and cure it when it is healed.
Weak limb after the bandage
When the fracture has been restored, and rests after the limb is weak and limp, if there is any cause for it, if there is anything causing it, it is because it was too tightly bound and was not properly bound as it should have been. or because there are too many bands on it, and cannot move properly; or for too many ligatures; or from too great movements, not without its harm. or because there is much blood in its substance, if it is weak
and the cure is to feed the patient sparingly and make the limb tender, until the pain is multiplied in him. And he gives a bath, and he does rejoice and delight.
Then he puts poultices on the limb, so that the poultices attract at the great nourishment, and the redness often arises from excessive heat, until the nourishment reaches the limb; and returns to its natural shape
The limb is twisted after the disease. When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the limb is deformed, although it does not lose its natural work
although those fools say that the limb must be broken anew, and many have held this opinion in our land;
it is blamed, and there comes great harm, and by chance the patient dies.
Toutefois, si les nodulations et la torture sont frais, si vous peut leur faire renaître d’eau chaude, ou herbes mollélifiantes soient cuites, comme feuille de vismalve, et racine, et mellilote, et cetera.
However, if the swellings and the torture are fresh, if you can make them arise from warm water, or cooked softening herbs such as balm leaves, and roots, and melilot, and so on; and apply a liberal plaster, as with aquaintance well made, take the nourishment of balm, and confirm with butter of gelatine or oil of poppy seed, and apply the plaster on top.
Or take fat figs, and grind them with poppy seeds, and similar medicines which appease the swelling.
And never is the bone loosened by continuous rubbing and length of time with wet hands. And provide movement to the limb at the shoulder hour.
And if the swelling is tough and hardened, like stone, and need iron, if you cover it just until the bone, with a slight incision; And put cushions and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury
When dislocation comes to no more, if you can now restore its normal position.
For if we delay, if it swells up in the limb, and by chance we reset it, we will have pricked the limb on the way.
For in this case we must not move it while it is swollen often brings vomiting and other pains;
however, when this has happened, if you make the patient comfortable, then leave him, until the swelling has subsided
then raise the limb with warmth and oil, and support it lightly, and treat each limb as it comes to its place
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint to the end of the foot.
When the mandibles are loosened and the dislocations of both are in two ways: Or they are a little stiff in their limbs, and soften a little. Or they are entirely loosened, and hang towards the ear, and keep their saliva in their mouth so that they cannot hold it, cannot close their mouths, and wrap their tongues with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it will often spontaneously reduce on its own.</start_of_turn>
And if they are whole and complete, if you must force them, then you must do it instantly, and do not linger;
and in such a way that the attendants hold the patient’s head firmly, and hold your gaze somewhat below the pocket of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts and the other two hands are loosened, to make them even
And instruct the patient to soften his teeth, jaw, and move them all around. And his eye should be level, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
And if they are crooked, even if both jaws are together, if they are raised with sharp heat and oil, until they are gently softened;
Do not force the return, as we have said before.
When they are returned equally, and the patient’s mouth is closed with good sense, put on soft cloths soaked in rose oil and beeswax, then bind them lightly with threads.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his arms resting between two cushions, so that they do not move forward or backward, do not attempt to force anything, but gently seize meat, until the pain is gone, and keep the jaws still
Then he must swallow what he wants lightly, and do not work himself to open his mouth to swallow or drink, until the jaw is well numb and healthy.
And if the two jaws do not manage to be returned to their point at an hour, and are not otherwise converted at their leisure, if thereby fever and customary sickness arise, and by chance solution of the belly, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
When you see that, then know that it is a loss of blood; and often death occurs from it in nine days
The forceps cannot remove from the bone without causing damage, and is useless every time it is attempted, and one can well tell.</start_of_turn
And the restoration is when the patient lies groaning on his back, and extends his arms; then press the limb firmly towards your palm, and it will return
then place the bandage and bind it well, and strain it
and the one who is beside the knife cannot unbind it Se poc non, et si il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit.
Then put on the support and the bandage, and strain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed;
and in this way the head of the shoulder is brought back into its place when it has been dislocated from its bone
From the dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways:
one that it dislocates at the shoulder blade at the armpit and the second at the top of the arm; And by chance it becomes loosened at the upper part, and this happens often.
and does not loosen behind for the scapula, and does not loosen from the inside for the nerves.
and often loosens downwards towards the buttocks, even among those who have plenty of flesh, because of these jumps they suffer greatly
because of those who have enough flesh, these jumps cause pain and return with pain.
And by chance it happens that there is a fracture or dislocation, and it inflates the shoulder with a hot abscess, and care must be taken that it is not displaced by this.</start_of_turn
It is therefore necessary that you expect it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation is when it is pulled towards the buttocks, and distinguishes between the sick scapula and the healthy one, and you will find between them their diversity manifested And you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and loosen the shoulder blade at the touch of the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bone. And you cannot make the patient move their hand back to its place, or move in any way
Also, if it is displaced upwards, if not hidden, for you will find it clearly at the touch
And this way of dislocation is not strong enough to restore it, when it is new, or if the patient is suffering
The way is that the physician holds the patient’s hand up above, then puts his thumbs under the shoulder blade, and holds the joint firmly up at the shoulder And the minister holds the hand, and extends it upwards, because he puts it down. if it comes to harm.
And if it does not come as we have said before, if it is known that the patient is in pain; then it must be that the patient be bathed in warm water and the minister brings comfort that is soothing and calming, such as decoction of alum and fenugreek and honey in water, and the like.</start_of_turn>
then put the patient on his back, and put under the seat a cushion of linen even, not too soft or too hard, and put the thumb of the hand over the cushion, and hold the shoulder joint firmly, and treat the hand of the patient.</start_of_turn>
And one other attendant grasps the head of the patient, so that it does not move backwards. Then the dislocation returns immediately, and if you see that it remains fixed in this manner:
and that you make the patient groan in pain more than he suffers; then you must stretch the shoulder downwards towards the costal margin, and hold the shoulder away from the patient’s side, and keep the shoulder high up so that the patient’s shoulder hangs down vertically. and another attendant treats the patient’s arm behind the belly If the patient is too light, if he can carry nothing heavy, the dislocation will return immediately.
And so it is also remedied in another way:
and by keeping the head of the shoulder long and tense in the earth, so that the head of the humerus is as resonant as the pestle, and is neither too thick nor too thin; Then let the patient lie down, but that he should have a soft blanket over, and that the patient should be quiet for a long time.
Then extend his arm from the other side and the joint will return to its place firmly
and if it does not return with all these things that we have said, if you do this cure: take two thumbs and three fingers wide, which has the head resting on the bone to enter under the armpit, as in this form:
then place over the head of the arm a soft blanket, so that the arm does not bleed the patient, and then put it under the armpit of the patient
and extend the arms above the arm for a long time, and hold the shoulder against the arm, and the hand on the head of the arm, and put the arm over one inch of a fingerbreadth, and let the forearm hang down, and leave the shoulder hanging down on the other side: The jointure remains firm now.
And when it is corrected, in whatever way it is, if you command that you put behind the shoulder a ball of wool as long as it is even, then put on the shoulder pad with a sprinkle of wheat flour, with incense and alum on the whole shoulder and around, then strain out behind the shoulder immediately, and turn the limb on the shoulder pad, and embrace the hand at its collar, and keep the hands still.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary that it move slightly, as long as the limb is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly.
Then move it more after five or seven days, and move it regularly And if it is stiff and cannot be softened, if it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If the joint is forced out of place by moisture or any other cause, then you must administer cautery three times over, as it is placed before or alongside the cautery.
And if you do all of this, and it comes loose after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot lift your arm up, then the nerves at the head of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or softened.</start_of_turn and the joint will never be stable in its place.</start_of_turn>
The dislocation which is towards the elbow, and the upper arm, or behind, if it is made by impulse, and extension of the hands, and it is administered with another binder.
and heals as long as it is whole.
And if after healing the limb complains by remaining stiff, if the patient uses it many times, while the stiffness gradually subsides, it returns to its former state.
And if after healing the limb complains by remaining stiff, if the patient uses it many times, while the stiffness gradually subsides, it returns to its former state.
When the joint of the shoulder is loosened at the points, and comes back at the points;
and is loosened all around, both front and back, and the dislocation is not properly restored, for it is seen and felt well; and is loosened like a deformed limb And when you join the patient with the limb, if he wishes to see it clearly. For the joint is tight, and cannot bend the arm, touch his shoulder at all.
and you must immediately re-establish it even if it comes out again, for if it comes out again, if it is repeated, it will cause great suffering to bring it back
And by chance it cannot be returned all at once, even if it is at the back. If it is more serious than the others, and causes greater pain, and by chance death comes from it.
When it is restored, if it is like this that we can bring it back, you stretch your hand with both hands; And the arms are spread out, and the hands down towards the navel, up and down, and keep the joint together with its bones joined, or at the root of the bone, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
And if the dislocation is in front, if it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and hold it from the root of the limb that is relaxed.
And if it does not want to return to its place, give strong extension;
and two assistants extend the limb and hold it for extension, so that it does not move during extension.</start_of_turn
Then twist the arm from the shoulder outwards, and when you have enveloped a double-layered bandage long and wide around it.
And when you look at the joint of the limb, if there is any oil on the joint to soften it, then stretch the joint until it snaps back into place.</start_of_turn>
And when it is fixed, if you put on dry packing with an egg-shaped weight, and the strain is complete, and you support the limb at the collarbone of the patient, and leave it for a while, then remove it.</start_of_turn>
And if the joint is firmly in its place, leave it alone and leave it alone.</start_of_turn
And if you see that the joint does not settle well, repeat the packing and the weight, and leave it like that until it is firmly set.</start_of_turn Then he lets go.
Then if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, if you bathe him and wipe him thoroughly, and press until it is relieved; or you put on the joint a fat mutton nail, then leave it in place for a day and a night, and then remove the nail, and wash it; and when he sweats, wipe the joint gently, and then put the nail back, and then enter or bathe. and do this two or three times until he is healed.
and if you see, put on a wet poultice soaked in urine with chaff, and strain it on;
If it returns to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
If the shoulder joint is loosened and the return is easy, more than the others. However, it is necessary to restore it to its place immediately, while it is loosened, even if the limb is swollen or there is an abscess
And restore it if you place the affected limb on a table, extend the limb, and look at its position, so that it places its palm on the surface of the joint and holds it until it returns to its place
However, take note that you must watch to see if it is truly in its place Then put the patient’s hand behind their back on a table during extension and reduction And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and I look put his hand on that appearance of the joint.
If it comes back now, that is good. If not, if the strain of the relaxed post-treatment hair causes the wound to reopen, and you leave it in its original position, it must recommence.</start_of_turn>
And if you cannot bear it, and you do not put it back after a few days, the joint will become stiff.</start_of_turn
and do not cause any pain to the patient except when the hand is softened, and cannot move anything at all.</start_of_turn therefore, when the nerves are cut or the arteries are clipped.</start_of_turn
if there is no other remedy except to extract by fire cautery, and by chance that is worth nothing.</start_of_turn
And when the hand is at rest, if you put on the bandage that we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove it and leave it be.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no pain, if there is hot swelling, and you rub it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
of the dislocation of the shoulder of the arm</start_of_turn>
Never are the thumbs desoiled at the wrist, never at the back of the palm or the belly.
Therefore, hold the thumb steady, and support the dislocation until it returns, then keep the head of the thumb towards the part where it is joined.
Leave it for two days, and then put it even again.
And do not bind it, as we have said, and do not move it, and bind it tightly
Do it often, until it is firm, and do the same if it is desoiled at the belly of the thumb, and do as you did before, until it is healed
And do the same if it is desoiled from another part.
Due to the loosening of the scapula from the back.
When the scapula of the back or the neck is loosened, or if there are several loosenings, if there is no remedy, for the patient’s life is in jeopardy.</start_of_turn>
And if the patient egests spur or urine contrary to their usual course, they will not be able to hold it, and often their limbs will be softened, or both thighs or both arms or one.
And often the limb will slip at three parts.
The one that slips at the back is called "gilbosite".
The cure is that if the "gilbosite" comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing in all
and that which comes from sitting or from blows or from similar things, say the old methods of treatment with great words, or there is no great benefit in them;
But I have abridged it according to my intention, and I have composed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes before the bite, there is no remedy;
And just as much as that which comes directly on two coasts, one cannot cure fire only for what comes from behind, as I have said
And it is that the patient should extend his face on one side and suffer from his eyes, without blinking.
Then I take a fist and put it at the head of the sufferer’s arm, and I take another and put it by the elbow, and I bind the upper part of the patient’s arm with a bandage, and I take another and put it on the thigh, and I take another and put it on the calf, and another on the ankle
And two ministers know the limits, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two thumbs.
And be well closed, the thumb as we have said, and the eye looks put its palms on the spine, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, take a handbreadth long, and hold the thumb down, and the patient lies on the side, and put the thumb of the handbreadth down by the side, then put the middle of the handbreadth on the spine and put the eye of the thumb on the other thumb of the handbreadth, and press well, until it returns to its place
and if you see that it breaks the nail that breaks at the hand. And it is that you pinch two times at the head of the patient of an arm of great size, and over the pieces two others, and between each pinch, a sow and an ounce, a palm of space of length.
and between each pinch, I make a hole, or the knot turns right, and let the pin be firmly in the ground so that it does not move.</start_of_turn>
and between two pins there is one pin that returns, so that the thread returns, and there are two small pins of a palm in length to secure the knot.</start_of_turn>
and then the thread that is among the pins at the knot over the head, and the other thread over the pieces at the other knot, and between these two pins turn their knot to the whole thread, and the master puts in the pin even as we have said.</start_of_turn
And when it is even, put upon an absorbent plaster with much yolk, and then press, and then support with a tablet of three fingers' length, that it may encompass the belly of the rib and the part of the spine that is sensitive; then bind with a thread, as we have said, and use the patient with subtle nourishment until he is healed.
And if nothing comes to an end of the sickness, if it is necessary, it is to administer soothing and relaxing medicines, with the support that we have mentioned before. And never give a piece of lead, and never does the appearance come from behind the spin of the back, and take care that this is not a dislocation; it is the bone that is opened, for we must not presume otherwise. By chance death comes to pass.
The joints of the thigh and the shoulder only come loose by dislocation, and do not come loose like the others;
The thigh joint is loosened in three parts: front and back, and front and back
the more inward it is, the more it is loosened front and back
And the knowledge of dislocation inwards is that when one joins the painful limb with the flesh, if it is longer, and opens more the patient's belly than before, and cannot double his knee over the fire; and it is the lord who is taken away by excessive heat, for in this case the head of the shoulder comes loose
And the sign of the one who comes to the rescue, if it is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned before.
And the sign of the one who has it in front, if he has it well his limb according to the accomplishment. However, do not double the knee joint because of pain, and if you see him making a fart, if he cannot hold it back, he will urinate, and swell his belly, and when he walks, he will pass over his heel.
And the sign of the one who comes to the rescue, if it is that he cannot expand his knee, cannot double it, and is that his limb is shorter than the other, and his ankle is softened, and that his shoulder joint is dislocated at the root of the ribs.
You must bring back this semblance of dislocation if it is an old one, and it will remain according to its disposition, if there is no remedy; and do not presume anything.
And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is a matter of three dislocations, if you hurry that you turn the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the front and the back; By chance, if it returns, and there is no need for another remedy.
If it does not return in this manner, if you must seize it firmly, with two hands or one that is sufficient, that it be bound upon the knee; And another minister extends his hand downwards in part as much as he can stretch out his hands downwards as far as his elbows, then grasp it with a thread that is sufficient for the hip bone And another holds the head of the limb.
And stretch up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted from the earth at once, and remains suspended
This method of extension is often used in this case, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If this does not work, it is necessary to apply another remedy.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder, if it is convenient, command the patient to lie on his side, then put the limb on the root of the humerus, and the limb which is below the elbow, then stretch the limb upwards towards the elbow and towards the forcele.
then take hold of his arms again, embrace the great limb of the painful shoulder, and extend it towards the front: if it returns to its place now;
and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you do not manage to hold it in this manner as we have said, if it is convenient, tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong thread above the two nails, and above the two knees, and let the painful limb be extended twice as much as the others.
Then let it hang from the top of a pole, or on the ground two arms’ length.
Then command the minister to grasp the head of the limb, and let another minister hang beside the patient, who graspes the limb, for the joint now returns firmly.</start_of_turn>
And when the dislocation is out of place, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of hiccuping, grasp the limb properly above and below the painful area.</start_of_turn
Then put two cushions, one at the head and one at the foot, and put one cushion between the thighs of the patient in the form of a cross.</start_of_turn And put moist towels around the area, so that it does not bleed the patient, then extend the thumbs of the ministers towards him, and the one who has the dislocation put it equal in his hand.</start_of_turn
If it returns, that is good.
If not, put on the table. Press on it as we said in the previous case, and keep the patient lying on the right side.
And when the dislocation is forward, if it is necessary to extend the affected limb immediately, do as I have said. and place the eye of the pain over the painful limb, then press on the other hand, and extend it towards the navel.
And if the dislocation is backward, if it is not possible to extend the limb forward, do not lift it up from the ground, but rather that it be as if it had been dislocated backward, as we have said above concerning the two fingers; be on its face, and the limb is extended as we have said before, and must be pressed on the joint at the table and will be at rest when the limb is straightened, and will be even. Therefore, grasp the thighs and place the support, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move. and rest for three days or four, then remove it, and place the support upon it
and if you see that they are even, if strained as before, and leave them for three days
then remove it, and make it swell gently, until the limb is comfortable.
of dislocation from the shoulder-blade.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: namely, forward and backward, and downward;
and do not damage it in front
and the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not move to his thigh, the dislocation has not been reduced;
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his limb if he can, and place your hand on his back, and place his foot on your knees.
Then take his shoulder joint in your palms, and pull inwards between your thumbs, then bend his two ribs forming the shoulder joint. And another minister extends his foot, until the shoulder joint returns to its place, and the sign is that his limb is properly aligned with his hip slightly bent
And place the bandage on, and make the limb breathe freely at the hip, and keep it bound firmly for three days or four, and then remove it
And do not move the patient too much, until the limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not at its proper place, if an extension is administered strongly, as we said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
of dislocation.
The talons never is measured, and never is fully evacuated, and always is swollen and painful.
And the sign is if the ankle is swollen, and it inclines toward the part where it is dislocated.
If it is slight, one must gently hold it out with the hands when it is only slightly swollen.
And when it is completely drained, if you must make the patient sit upright, and hold him firmly by the leg under the ankle;
Then pull the limb towards your right hand, then to the left twice, and then stretch it upwards, and keep the limb well stretched out
And do this twice as we have said, while pulling and stretching the limb
If it returns, that is good.
If not, if you begin the work again, for it will return.
If it cannot return at once, if you make the patient lie face down on the earth, and place your foot firmly on the ground between his thighs, and spread out the blankets around him, that he does not groan;
Then hold the limb firmly, and another assistant should extend the limb at his hands or at the elbow, which is placed on the collarbone of the limb. Then extend the shoulders of the assistants equally, and hold the dressing either beside the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when it is extended
Then place the eyes equally on the dislocation at his hands, and another assistant grasps the limb firmly at the shoulder, and the dislocation will return immediately.
When she reaches a point, put on the dressing and stamp above, and strain forms, and lie the thumb to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that they are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the strain subsides, if the tension is released
Then take it off at a third or a fourth, and tell the patient to wait for three days; And if it goes before this time, it is not certain that it will not damage again.
And if it persists, it is necessary to know that it must be appeased, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
otherwise When they are dislocated, if they are properly repositioned without resistance, it is a light matter.
And if the dislocation is not in any knot of the bone, it is to be known that you must make the patient sit on one leg or on the table straight, and put your thumb on what is open of these joints, and press your thumb until it returns
And when they are even, and nothing is open, if you put some salt on the plant of the foot and put it on a table for two fingers, then the swelling will form, and leave it for three days, then take it off. and rest it until it is healed.
It is from wound and dislocation together.
When the wound comes with the dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times it has been that the patient died:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you do not know the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and late, do not be bold;
and use at first soothing things about the abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; And when you see hope, if you now restore the limb to its place, even if the incisions remain open;
And when the limb is in its place, if you administer calming things around the incision, and cure the wound, as it should be, with dried oil;
And if there is a fracture of the dislocation, and minor bones are fractured, if the bones are displaced, do as we have said in simple ailments;
And take care not to enter the way of fear, as I have said, for this will bring you harm according to your Creator, and for the preservation of your soul and body.
